

--- PAGE 1 ---
Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term 
Improvements to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes 
November 2024
This communication was printed, published, or produced and disseminated at U.S. taxpayer expense. The information provided in this document is intended only to be a 
general informal summary of technical legal standards. It is not intended to take the place of the statutes, regulations, or formal policy guidance that it is based upon. This 
document summarizes current policy and operations as of the date it was presented. We encourage readers to refer to the applicable statutes, regulations, and other 
interpretive materials for complete and current information.
1



--- PAGE 2 ---
Objectives
This deck summarizes the CMCS Informational Bulletin (CIB), Use of 
Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to State 
Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes, and is part of a series of 
resources for states as they work to comply with federal requirements.
This slide deck is intended to provide states with guidance regarding the 
continued use of certain streamlined eligibility and enrollment strategies 
that were available to address challenges during the COVID-19 Public 
Health Emergency (PHE) and the return to regular operations following 
the end of the Medicaid continuous enrollment condition described in 
section 6008(b)(3) of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, the 
process commonly referred to as “unwinding.” 
Source: CMS CIB, Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment 
Processes.
2



--- PAGE 3 ---
Content Overview
Context Setting
― Use of Strategies Authorized by Section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act During Unwinding
― Approved Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers
Continued Availability of Unwinding-Related Waiver Strategies Beyond June 30, 2025
― Future Use of Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
― Strategies Codified in Final Eligibility and Enrollment Rule
― Strategies Available Under State Plan Authority 
― Strategies Related to Verifying Income and Resources
Discontinued Blanket Authority for Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations to Delay Procedural Disenrollments
State Resources
3



--- PAGE 4 ---
Context Setting
4



--- PAGE 5 ---
Use of Strategies Authorized by Section 1902(e)(14)(A) of 
the Act During Unwinding
To support states facing operational and systems issues and to protect eligible 
beneficiaries from inappropriate coverage losses during the unwinding period, the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) provided states with the option to 
request authority under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Social Security Act (the Act).
As outlined in the March 3, 2022, State Health Official (SHO) letter, CMS granted approval 
for states to use time-limited authority to streamline eligibility and enrollment processes, 
protect eligible individuals from becoming disenrolled, facilitate the renewal process, 
reduce the number of procedural terminations, and ease the state administrative burden 
during the unwinding. 
On May 9, 2024, CMS extended the use of these waivers through June 30, 2025, provided 
that the terms and conditions of the original waiver continue to be met.
Sources: CMS CIB, Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment 
Processes; CMS SHO, Promoting Continuity of Coverage and Distributing Eligibility and Enrollment Workload in Medicaid, the Children’s 
Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Upon Conclusion of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency; CMS CIB, 
Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities.
5



--- PAGE 6 ---
Approved Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers
Since April 2022, CMS has granted over 400 unwinding-related waivers to 52 states and 
territories that enabled them to streamline different parts of their renewal processes in 
support of their unwinding efforts.
A combined fifty states and territories received waiver approval to adopt strategies to 
increase ex parte rates, thereby minimizing administrative burdens for states and 
beneficiaries while supporting eligible individuals’ ability to renew their coverage. 
Thirty states received approval for waivers designed to better support enrollees with 
renewal completion and submission. 
Forty-five states received approval for strategies that facilitated their ability to update 
beneficiary contact information with information from trusted sources, minimizing 
coverage losses due to states’ inability to reach people.
Twenty states used waivers to ensure the reinstatement of eligible individuals who had 
been disenrolled for procedural reasons.
Note: For additional information on the section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers CMS has approved for states and territories to support the unwinding 
period, see https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/unwinding-and-returning-regular-operations-
after-covid-19/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-approvals/index.html. 
6



--- PAGE 7 ---
Continued Availability of Unwinding-Related 
Waiver Strategies Beyond June 30, 2025
7



--- PAGE 8 ---
Future Use of Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver 
Strategies  
To continue supporting states’ ability to strengthen and streamline renewal, CMS reviewed all 
section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies to determine which can be implemented on a long-
term basis.
o CMS received input from states, beneficiaries, and other stakeholders that these 
strategies meaningfully improved efforts to renew eligible people’s coverage. 
o CMS reviewed strategies made available during unwinding to determine whether states 
could continue using these strategies under existing federal statutory or regulatory 
authorities to strengthen and streamline renewal systems on a long-term basis.
CMS determined that states have the option or will be required by recent rulemaking to 
implement over half of the strategies under their state plan in accordance with statutory 
and regulatory authorities.
The remaining unwinding-related strategies cannot continue absent extenuating 
circumstances necessitating their use. As such unwinding-related circumstances are 
abating, existing statutory and regulatory requirements do not allow states to continue 
these strategies without justification and approval under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the 
Act.
8



--- PAGE 9 ---
Strategies Codified in Final Eligibility and Enrollment Rule
Several strategies were codified in regulations by the final eligibility and enrollment rule 
published on April 2, 2024.1 
Applying for Other Benefits Strategy – The requirement to apply for other benefits as a condition of 
Medicaid eligibility has been eliminated for all applicants and beneficiaries. All states must eliminate any 
requirement to apply for other benefits as a condition of Medicaid eligibility by no later than June 3, 
2025, and may do so sooner.
Strategies to Obtain Updated Beneficiary Contact Information – States must establish a process to 
obtain updated address information from reliable sources.
— States must use the National Change of Address (NCOA) database, mail returned by the U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS) with a forwarding address, and managed care organizations (MCOs) to update 
beneficiary contact information. If the state receives an updated in-state address from a reliable 
source, it must accept the information, update the beneficiary's case record with the updated 
address, and notify the beneficiary of the change. All states must comply with this requirement by 
December 3, 2025, and may do so sooner.
— Additionally, the final rule provides states with flexibility to deem other sources identified by the 
agency and approved by the Secretary as reliable for purposes of obtaining updated contact 
information. States may opt to deem enrollment brokers and/or Program of All-Inclusive Care for the 
Elderly (PACE) organizations to be reliable sources.
Notes:
1. These strategies were codified in the final rule, Streamlining the Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program, and Basic Health 
Program Application, Eligibility Determination, Enrollment, and Renewal Processes, which took effect June 3, 2024. Compliance with 
new requirements is phased in through June 3, 2027, with compliance timeframes varying by provision.
9



--- PAGE 10 ---
Strategies Available Under State Plan Authority
Certain waiver strategies are permissible in a materially similar way at states’ option under 
state plan authority.
Streamlining Asset Determinations Strategy – Under section 
1902(r)(2) of the Act, states may disregard (i.e., not count) 
otherwise countable income and/or resources in making 
non-MAGI1 eligibility determinations. States can disregard 
increases in beneficiary’s assets after their date of application.
Stable Income and Asset Strategy – States have flexibility to make a reasonable determination of what types of 
income and assets are highly likely to remain stable (or even decrease in value) in conducting an ex parte 
renewal.2 
MCO Renewal Support Strategy – Under existing managed care regulations, states may permit MCOs to conduct 
outreach and assist beneficiaries with completing and submitting renewal forms, provided that the plan does 
not provide choice counseling and does not sign the renewal form on behalf of the beneficiary. 
State Agency and/or Other Qualified Entities Using Presumptive Eligibility (PE) Strategy – Under existing 
regulations, states may permit qualified entities, including the state agency itself, to make PE determinations on 
a MAGI-basis for individuals not enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP. State agencies must treat a renewal form 
returned during the reconsideration period as an application. Thus, in adopting this strategy, states would 
extend the individual's PE status until the state has completed a determination of eligibility based on the 
renewal form. 
Further details on the most-
commonly-used strategies related to 
verifying income and resources can 
be found on slides 11–17.
Notes: 
1. MAGI is Modified Adjusted Gross Income. Non-MAGI refers to individuals excepted from MAGI-based financial methodologies under 
42 C.F.R. § 435.603(j).
2. Additional information on ex parte renewals will be included in forthcoming guidance.
10



--- PAGE 11 ---
Strategies Related to Verifying Income and Resources
Unwinding-related waiver strategies to streamline income and resource verification during the 
ex parte process were particularly effective in supporting states’ efforts to minimize the 
administrative burden associated with conducting renewals and prevent the improper 
disenrollment of eligible beneficiaries. 
Existing verification policies can be used to achieve long-term use of these strategies.1

 
Using Gross Income 
Determinations 
from SNAP2 and 
Other Human 
Services Programs
Completing an ex 
parte renewal when 
no data sources3 
return income 
information
Streamlining the use 
of the state’s asset 
verification system 
(AVS)
Notes: 
1. Additional information regarding the data and analyses supporting the rationale for long-term use of these strategies is included in 
the CIB.
2. SNAP is the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. 
3. Throughout the following sections, references to “data sources” means those data sources a state uses to verify eligibility factors for 
Medicaid. These data sources must be identified in the state’s verification plan, as required by 42 C.F.R. 435.945(j).
11



--- PAGE 12 ---
Using Gross Income Determinations from SNAP and Other 
Human Services Programs
States may use SNAP gross income as a data source for verifying MAGI-based income 
eligibility.
Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority: 

To simplify the use of SNAP and TANF information when making eligibility determinations during 
unwinding, CMS waived the requirement to make a Medicaid income determination for 
individuals whose gross income, as determined by the state’s SNAP and/or TANF agency, was at or 
below the applicable Medicaid income standard. 
State Plan Option: 

States have flexibility, within certain parameters, to determine which data sources are useful in 
verifying income.1 States have flexibility to determine that the gross income determination made 
by SNAP is a useful source of data to verify income for MAGI-based eligibility. 

States may find SNAP gross income or other program data useful in verifying income for non-
MAGI beneficiaries. States may also find data from other human services programs, such as TANF, 
useful for verifying MAGI-based eligibility. If interested, a state must conduct and share with CMS 
an analysis to demonstrate the data’s usefulness and identify it in the state’s verification plan.
Notes: 
1. States can continue to use the underlying data for specific types of income in an applicant or beneficiary’s SNAP record. 
12



--- PAGE 13 ---
Implementing the Use of SNAP Gross Income as a Data 
Source

When considering implementation of this strategy, states should assess the 
usefulness of SNAP data in the same manner as they are expected to do for other 
data sources, considering such factors as the accuracy, timeliness, 
comprehensiveness, and complexity of accessing the data. 

States can use a gross income determination from SNAP as a data source for 
verifying income eligibility for MAGI Medicaid.1 

If determined useful, states can use SNAP gross income determinations as a data 
source at application, at renewal, or both.

States may also target this strategy to specific populations, for example, using the 
strategy only for individuals whose SNAP gross income is at or below a specified 
level, e.g., 100 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL).
Notes:
1. CMS does not believe that states could reasonably conclude that net income for purposes of SNAP eligibility is useful in verifying MAGI-
based income, as the determination of net SNAP income involves deduction of several significant income disregards from the gross 
income amount. 
13



--- PAGE 14 ---
Options to Complete Ex Parte Renewal When No Data 
Sources Return Income Information
States may consider individuals with a previously-verified attestation of zero-dollar income or 
income at or below 100% of the FPL as having income that is highly unlikely to change.
Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority: 

During unwinding, CMS authorized two related waiver strategies for individuals with prior determinations of 
zero-dollar income and individuals with a prior determination of income at or below 100% of the FPL that 
enabled states to renew coverage on an ex parte basis when the state checked all available income data 
sources, but no income data was returned. 
State Plan Option:

Under current verification policies,1 states have flexibility to consider information in a beneficiary’s account 
reliable if the state has determined the information is highly unlikely to change or, in the case of income or 
assets, highly unlikely to increase.

CMS has determined it would be reasonable for a state to determine that the previously-verified income in 
a beneficiary’s account is reliable in conducting an ex parte renewal if: 
1.
The individual had a previously-verified attestation of income at or below an income level (including 
zero-dollar income) elected by the state, not to exceed 100% FPL; 
2.
The state has checked all available income data sources according to its verification plan and no 
information is received; and 
3.
The state follows its verification plan to confirm the beneficiary’s continued state residency.2
Notes:
1.
Additional guidance on state verification requirements and flexibilities is forthcoming.
2.
Effective December 3, 2025, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.919(f) and 457.344, states are required to regularly obtain updated address information from reliable 
data sources and update the beneficiary’s record with that information if a data source provides an updated in-state address. If a reliable data source provides an 
out-of-state address, the state must terminate the beneficiary's coverage if the beneficiary does not confirm they continue to meet the residency requirements.
14



--- PAGE 15 ---
Implementing the Strategy to Complete Ex Parte Renewal 
When No Data Sources Return Income Information
States may elect to apply this strategy only to individuals whose previously-verified 
income was zero dollars or to individuals whose previously-verified income was at or 
below a standard elected by the state, up to 100% FPL, and may elect a different income 
standard for different eligibility groups.
States adopting this strategy must also establish and document a maximum amount of 
time that is permitted to elapse since the state last verified a beneficiary’s income (either 
at application or renewal).1 
States must have the information necessary to match with the income data sources used 
by the state (e.g., Social Security Number).
States must take steps to review other non-financial eligibility criteria. 
States must notify individuals of the requirement to inform the agency if the information 
relied on in the renewal is inaccurate.
Notes:
1. CMS considers a verified attestation of income that was made no earlier than three years prior to be reasonable. However, states may 
establish a different reasonable amount of time.
15



--- PAGE 16 ---
Strategy to Streamline Use of Asset Verification System 
(AVS)
States can assume no change in resources when no information is returned through the AVS 
or when information is not returned within a reasonable timeframe.
Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority: 

For individuals subject to an asset test whose eligibility is being determined on the basis of being age 65 or older or 
having blindness or a disability, section 1940 of the Act requires states to use an Asset Verification System (AVS) to 
verify assets held in a financial institution.

During unwinding, CMS approved a waiver strategy that allowed states to assume no change in assets verified 
through the AVS when no information is returned or when information is not returned within a reasonable 
timeframe and complete the ex parte renewal process without any further verification of assets. 
State Plan Option:

Current verification policies require that a state establish a reasonable timeframe to wait for information to be 
returned from its AVS before requesting documentation or other information to verify assets. 

Provided a state builds into its ex parte renewal process a reasonable period of time for financial institutions to 
respond to an AVS query, CMS has determined that the state may assume no change in the value of a previously-
verified asset if the state submits a request through its AVS and no information is returned or there is no response 
from the AVS within the reasonable timeframe the state has established.1 This would enable the state to complete 
an ex parte renewal without requesting additional documentation of asset types that can be verified with AVS. 

If the individual only has assets held in financial institutions, or their only other assets are not likely to appreciate in 
value, the state would be able to complete the ex parte renewal. 

Any information returned by AVS that might impact eligibility after an individual's eligibility has been renewed must 
be treated as a change in circumstances in accordance with 42 CFR 435.919.
Notes: 
1. Regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.916 afford states the flexibility to determine that certain assets are unlikely to appreciate in value and allow 
states to rely on the value of the asset in a beneficiary’s account at renewal. 
16



--- PAGE 17 ---
Implementing the Streamlined Use of AVS
In establishing a reasonable timeframe to wait for data to be returned from its AVS, 
states should consider the response times experienced in their AVS.
The reasonable timeframe does not need to be the same at application as at renewal.
States may consider initiating the AVS check ahead of other data sources that are 
checked during the ex parte process to account for a potentially lengthier AVS response 
time. 
The state must notify individuals of the requirement to inform the agency if the asset 
information used in the renewal is inaccurate (required for all ex parte renewals).
If the state receives asset information from the AVS after a beneficiary has been renewed 
on an ex parte basis, the information from the AVS must be processed as a change in 
circumstance.
17



--- PAGE 18 ---
Discontinued Blanket Authority for Unwinding-
Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
18



--- PAGE 19 ---
Discontinued Blanket Waiver Authority
Existing statutory and regulatory requirements do not allow states to continue the following 
strategies under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act after June 30, 2025. 
― Suspend the requirement to cooperate in obtaining medical support
― Waive the requirement to record telephonic signatures 
― Permit designation of an authorized representative over the telephone without a signed 
designation
― Renew Medicaid eligibility for children and/or non-MAGI beneficiaries for 12 months based on 
the individual’s most recent Medicaid determination 
― Delay resumption of Medicaid premiums until after redetermining eligibility
― Extend eligibility in the Former Foster Care Children group to youth formerly in foster care from 
any state, without regard to when the individual turned age 18
― Extend the timeframe to take final action on fair hearing requests and provide benefits pending a 
final decision to all individuals who request a hearing
― Reinstate eligibility back to termination date for those procedurally terminated who are 
determined eligible during the reconsideration period without determining retroactive eligibility
― Extend automatic reenrollment into a managed care plan up to 120 days after loss of Medicaid
Notes: Additional details regarding the strategies whose blanket authority will be discontinued after June 30, 2025, and potential 
alternative approaches states may adopt are included in the appendix table that accompanies the CIB.
19



--- PAGE 20 ---
Use of 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority Beyond June 30, 
2025

CMS recognizes that states are in various stages of resuming routine eligibility and enrollment 
operations. States may continue to use unwinding-related flexibilities through June 30, 2025.

As states work toward full compliance with renewal requirements, CMS expects states to 
continue or initiate mitigation strategies to minimize the impact of any non-compliance with 
requirements on Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries. 

States are instructed to outline proposed mitigations or seek approval for waivers, as 
appropriate, under section 1902(e)(14)(A) as part of the renewal compliance template. 
― To use any of the strategies for which the blanket approval is sunsetting and that are not 
permissible under current regulations, a state must request, and receive CMS approval of, 
new waiver authority. 

States may also seek CMS approval for section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers for strategies beyond 
those noted in the CIB, whether needed in the context of renewal compliance or for another 
purpose.

Any requests to use 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver authority will be considered individually and 
approved on a time-limited basis.
Notes: For additional information, see September 20, 2024, CIB, State Compliance with Medicaid and CHIP Renewal Requirements by 
December 31, 2026. December 31, 2026 
20



--- PAGE 21 ---
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations 
to Delay Procedural Terminations
21



--- PAGE 22 ---
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations to Delay 
Procedural Terminations
During the unwinding, CMS concurred with states’ use of the regulatory timeliness exception1 
to delay procedural disenrollments for up to three months. This enabled states to conduct 
targeted outreach to encourage beneficiaries to return their renewal form.
As states return to regular operations, CMS’s broad concurrence with the application of 
this option will sunset after June 30, 2025, as states are expected to have made 
significant progress in resuming operations. 
However, to achieve a similar result, states can build additional time into their renewal 
process by adjusting the timing of renewal notifications to:
― provide beneficiaries more time to return their renewal form; and
― conduct targeted outreach before the end of the eligibility period to beneficiaries at risk of 
losing coverage for procedural reasons.
If a state experiences an administrative or other emergency (e.g., natural disaster) and 
the state would like to use the timeliness exception to delay procedural terminations to 
conduct targeted outreach, CMS strongly recommends that the state seek CMS 
concurrence to do so. 
Notes: 
1. The exception to timely determinations of eligibility at 42 C.F.R. § 435.912(e) permits a state to exceed the timeliness standard when 
there is an administrative or other emergency beyond the agency’s control.
22



--- PAGE 23 ---
State Resources
23



--- PAGE 24 ---
CMS Resources to Support States
•
CMCS Informational Bulletin, Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to 
State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes, November 2024, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cibe1411142024.pdf
•
CMCS Informational Bulletin, Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities, May 2024, available 
at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf
•
Medicaid Program; “Streamlining the Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program, and Basic Health 
Program Application, Eligibility Determination, and Renewal Processes” final rule (89 FR 22836) available at: 
https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2024-06566
•
SHO# 22-001, Promoting Continuity of Coverage and Distributing Eligibility and Enrollment Workload in 
Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Upon 
Conclusion of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, March 2022, available at:  
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/sho22001.pdf 
•
COVID-19 PHE Unwinding Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Approvals, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/unwinding-and-
returning-regular-operations-after-covid-19/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-
approvals/index.html 
24
