

--- PAGE 1 ---
 
End of the Medicaid Continuous Enrollment Condition Frequently Asked Questions 
for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies 
May 12, 2023 
 
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has released numerous guidance 
documents and tools to help states prepare for the end of the Medicaid continuous enrollment 
condition under the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) on March 31, 2023, 
including these two State Health Official (SHO) Letters: (1) Promoting Continuity of Coverage 
and Distributing Eligibility and Enrollment Workload in Medicaid, the Children’s Health 
Insurance Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Upon Conclusion of the COVID-
19 Public Health Emergency (SHO #22-001, dated March 3, 2022); and (2) Medicaid 
Continuous Enrollment Condition Changes, Conditions for Receiving the FFCRA Temporary 
FMAP Increase, Reporting Requirements, and Enforcement Provisions in the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2023 (SHO #23-002, dated January 27, 2023). 
 
CMS is releasing these answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs) regarding the changes 
made to the FFCRA by section 5131 of subtitle D of title V of division FF of the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2023 (P.L. 117-328) (CAA, 2023), SHO #23-002, and related CMS 
guidance. These answers also address questions regarding changes made by section 1002(a)(1) 
of the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment for 
Patients and Communities (“SUPPORT”) Act, Pub. L. 115-271, enacted on October 24, 2018, 
regarding eligibility changes for the Former Foster Care Children (FFCC) group under section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX) of the Social Security Act.  For additional information regarding the 
SUPPORT Act changes for youth formerly in foster care, see State Health Official letter #22-003 
and accompanying slide deck (issued December 16, 2023), available on Medicaid.gov.  
CMS plans to update this document as needed to support state unwinding efforts and provide 
additional guidance to states. For more information, including resources and tools to support 
state unwinding efforts, as well as information shared during all-state calls, please visit 
www.Medicaid.gov/unwinding. 
Returned Mail Condition Under Section 6008(f)(2)(C) of the Families First Coronavirus 
Response Act (FFCRA) 
 
Section 6008(f)(2)(C) of the FFCRA, which was added by the CAA, 2023, establishes a new 
condition of receiving the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase, applicable for quarters in the 
period beginning April 1, 2023 and ending December 31, 2023. Under this condition, known as 
the “returned mail condition,” states claiming the temporary FMAP increase during this period 
must undertake a good-faith effort to contact an individual using more than one modality prior to 
terminating their enrollment on the basis of returned mail. The following questions and answers 
relate to this condition. 
 
Q1: For the purpose of the returned mail condition, how does CMS define a good faith 
effort to contact an individual using more than one modality?  
 



--- PAGE 2 ---
 
2 
A1: When states receive returned mail in response to a redetermination of eligibility, they must 
undertake a good faith effort to contact an individual using more than one modality prior to 
disenrollment on the basis of returned mail. For the purposes of meeting this returned mail 
condition, a good-faith effort to contact an individual using more than one modality means: (1) 
consistent with section 6008(f)(2)(B) of the FFCRA, the state has a process in place to obtain up-
to-date mailing addresses and additional contact information (including phone numbers and 
email addresses) for all beneficiaries for whom the state conducts a renewal of eligibility; and (2) 
the state attempts to reach an individual whose mail is returned through at least two modalities 
using the most up-to-date contact information the state has for the individual, which could 
include a forwarding address if one is provided on the returned mail. 
 
Q2: Can a state satisfy the returned mail condition by conducting outreach to a beneficiary 
through one or more modalities before the state receives the applicable returned mail?  
 
A2: Generally, yes. Beneficiary outreach conducted either at the same time as or after the state 
sends notice to a beneficiary instructing them to return a renewal form or a request for additional 
information needed to make an eligibility determination at renewal, but before the state receives 
returned mail, counts as a good faith effort to contact the individual through one or more 
modalities only if the following conditions are met: 
 
1. The outreach provides information specific to the beneficiary’s renewal;  
2. An attempt to contact the beneficiary after receiving the returned mail would be 
duplicative of the state’s attempts to contact the beneficiary before receiving the returned 
mail; and 
3. The outreach includes language that:  
a) explains that a renewal notice has been sent by mail,  
b) directs a beneficiary on how to complete the renewal, and  
c) provides instructions on how to reach the state agency for assistance through all other 
available modes with information on available language access and auxiliary aids and 
services (e.g., instructs the beneficiary to complete the renewal in the online portal or to 
call the state at a number provided, including the TTY number, in the outreach to 
complete the renewal by phone or obtain a paper renewal form).  
 
Q3: Must a state take further action to comply with the returned mail condition if the state 
has attempted to use two modalities at the same time as or after the mail with a renewal 
notice or request for additional information is sent to the beneficiary, but before returned 
mail is received? 
 
A3: No. No further action is required to meet the returned mail condition under section 
6008(f)(2)(C) of the FFCRA if the state follows the requirements specified in the answer to 
question 2 above by attempting two modalities at the same time as or after sending the 
beneficiary notice with instructions about completing the renewal form or requesting additional 
information necessary to make a renewal determination, provided this beneficiary outreach is 
conducted before the returned mail is received. 
  



--- PAGE 3 ---
 
3 
If the state is only able to conduct outreach using one modality prior to receiving the returned 
mail because it only has one mode of contact available (e.g., only an email address), the state 
must send any mail that is returned with a forwarding address to the forwarding address provided  
the state is able to do so. 
 
Q4: Does a state need to conduct outreach through more than one modality under the 
returned mail condition if mail with a beneficiary’s renewal notice or request for additional 
information is returned after an individual’s coverage has been terminated? 
 
A4: Yes. For beneficiaries whose renewal is initiated during the state’s unwinding period, if a 
beneficiary’s renewal notice or request for additional information is returned to the state within 
30 days after a beneficiary’s coverage is terminated for failure to respond, a state seeking to 
satisfy the returned mail condition must attempt to contact the individual using more than one  
modality, including phone, email, text, or a forwarding address provided on the returned mail. 
States have the option to act on mail returned to the agency within 90 days, or a longer period 
elected by the state, after a beneficiary’s coverage is terminated. 
 
Q5:  In order to comply with the returned mail condition, must states reinstate coverage 
for a beneficiary if mail with a renewal notice or request for additional information is 
returned after a beneficiary’s coverage has been terminated for failure to respond to a 
renewal form or request for additional information? 
  
A5: Generally, yes. If a beneficiary responds to the state’s outreach as described in the answer to 
question 5 above, the state must promptly reinstate the beneficiary’s coverage with an effective 
date of either: (1) the date that the state reestablishes contact with the beneficiary; or (2) the first 
day of the month when the contact is made. 
  
After the state obtains up-to-date contact information from the beneficiary as required by section 
6008(f)(2)(B) of the FFCRA, the state must provide the beneficiary with an opportunity to 
furnish any information needed to complete the eligibility determination. If the state needs to 
send a new renewal form, the state must provide modified adjusted gross income (MAGI)-based 
beneficiaries with 30 days and non-MAGI beneficiaries a reasonable period of time to respond. 
If the returned mail was a request for additional information needed to complete the beneficiary’s 
renewal, the state must provide the reasonable amount of time it generally provides beneficiaries 
to respond to requests for information, such as 10 days or more. 
 
If the beneficiary timely returns the information and is determined eligible, the state must 
provide coverage for any Medicaid-covered services furnished back to the date of termination. If 
the beneficiary fails to respond within the time allowed, the state must send a 10-day advance 
notice of termination and fair hearing rights. 
 
Q6: Would the returned mail condition be satisfied if a managed care plan acted on behalf 
of a state agency to conduct the beneficiary outreach that is required through more than 
one modality? 
 



--- PAGE 4 ---
 
4 
A6: Yes, managed care plans may act on behalf of a state agency to conduct beneficiary outreach  
if the state has approved such activity. Medicaid managed care plans cannot engage in marketing 
or marketing activities prohibited under the managed care marketing regulations at 42 CFR § 
438.104, which provides that a managed care plan must not distribute marketing materials 
without the state’s approval.  The same requirements (except subsection § 438.104(c), related to 
state agency review) also apply to separate CHIPs through a cross reference at 42 CFR § 
457.1224.  The regulation at 42 CFR § 438.104 provides that managed care plans, as permitted 
by their contracts with the state, may send materials to their enrollees about the importance of 
completing the state’s Medicaid eligibility renewal process in a timely fashion and about 
Qualified Health Plan (QHP) enrollment options. We remind states and managed care plans that 
Medicaid managed care contracts must include provisions for prompt notification to the state by 
the plan of information about changes in an enrollee’s circumstances that may affect the 
enrollee's eligibility, including changes in residence (42 CFR 438.608(a)(3)).  The same 
requirements also apply to separate CHIPs through a cross reference at 42 CFR § 457.1285, 
incorporating most of Part 438, subpart H of our regulations. 
  
In addition, states may engage managed care plans to conduct outreach on the state’s behalf to 
beneficiaries about the eligibility renewal process.  State agencies seeking to work with managed 
care plans to conduct such additional outreach to support the eligibility renewals of their 
enrollees should ensure they have the appropriate contracts in place for the managed care plan to 
conduct outreach activities on behalf of the state.  Such arrangements would be separate and 
independent from the managed care plan’s contract governed by section 1903(m)(2)(A) and 42 
CFR Part 438, and payment to managed care plans for performing such administrative activities 
for the state may not be included in the actuarially sound capitation rates paid for covering 
Medicaid benefits. 
  
For additional information on how managed care plans can conduct outreach with their enrollees, 
please refer to the Overview of Strategic Approach to Engaging managed Care Plans to 
Maximize Continuity of Coverage as States Resume Normal Eligibility and Enrollment 
Operations available at https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/downloads/health-plan-
strategy-12062021.pdf.  
 
Q7: When will states need to implement the returned mail condition?  Does it need to be 
implemented for an entire quarter for a state to claim the temporary FFCRA FMAP 
increase? 
 
A7: The returned mail condition for the FFCRA FMAP increase applies, as described in section 
6008(a) and (f)(1) of the FFCRA, for each calendar quarter occurring during the period that 
begins on April 1, 2023, and ends on December 31, 2023. States cannot claim the temporary 
FFCRA FMAP increase in a quarter during this period unless they comply with the returned mail 
condition under section 6008(f)(2)(C) of the FFCRA during that entire quarter. 
 
Medicaid Resumption of Premiums 
 
Prior to the enactment of the CAA, 2023, under section 6008(b)(2) of the FFCRA states could 
not claim the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase if they imposed any premium “with respect to 
an individual” that exceeded the amount of such premium as of January 1, 2020. CMS 



--- PAGE 5 ---
 
5 
interpreted this condition to mean that a state claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase 
could not increase the amount of any premium charged to an individual enrollee (even if that 
person’s income increased). The CAA, 2023 modified this condition, as described in SHO #23-
002 and in the questions and answers that follow.1  
 
Q8: Did the CAA, 2023, give states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase greater 
flexibility regarding the amount of Medicaid premiums imposed on a specific individual? 
A8: Generally, yes. The CAA, 2023 amended section 6008(b)(2) of the FFCRA effective April 
1, 2023 to remove the language “with respect to an individual.” As discussed in SHO #23-002, 
this change gives states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase greater flexibility to 
increase the amount of Medicaid premiums imposed on a given individual, as long as the 
amounts in the state’s Medicaid premium schedule don’t exceed the amounts that were in place 
as of January 1, 2020.2 Between April 1, 2023, and December 31, 2023, states claiming the 
FFCRA temporary FMAP increase must meet the condition in section 6008(b)(2) of the FFCRA, 
as amended. 
 
Under the amended FFCRA section 6008(b)(2) condition, subject to the conditions and 
requirements discussed in this FAQ and the beneficiary protections described in Q12, states 
claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase may charge individual beneficiaries higher 
premium amounts than they were charged as of January 1, 2020, as long as the amounts in the 
state’s Medicaid premium schedule don’t exceed the amounts that were in place as of January 1, 
2020. For example, a change in a beneficiary’s household income or household composition may 
place the beneficiary in a higher premium tier or band, or a beneficiary may have been moved to 
a different eligibility group that is subject to a higher premium amount.3 
 
In addition to meeting the FFCRA section 6008(b)(2) condition (and other applicable FFCRA 
conditions) if the state is claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase, any state charging 
Medicaid premiums must always comply with certain general requirements, including: 
 
• Ensuring that premiums charged are consistent with the state’s approved Medicaid 
premium schedule; 
• Complying with all applicable premium requirements and limitations specified at sections 
1916 and 1916A of the Social Security Act (the Act) and 42 CFR §§ 447.50 through 
447.57; and  
                                                          
1 CMS. (2023). Medicaid Continuous Enrollment Condition Changes, Conditions for Receiving the FFCRA 
Temporary FMAP Increase, Reporting Requirements, and Enforcement Provisions in the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2023. Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-
guidance/downloads/sho23002.pdf. 
2 CMS. (2023). Medicaid Continuous Enrollment Condition Changes, Conditions for Receiving the FFCRA 
Temporary FMAP Increase, Reporting Requirements, and Enforcement Provisions in the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2023. Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-
guidance/downloads/sho23002.pdf  
3 Previous guidance indicated that states must maintain premiums for an individual at the same or lower level that 
was assessed as of January 1, 2020. See discussion in FAQ#II.B.9-10, and 12 of: CMS. (2021). COVID-19 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for State Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) Agencies, 
Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-center/downloads/covid-19-faqs.pdf. This document updates 
that guidance due to the CAA, 2023 amendments to FFCRA section 6008. 



--- PAGE 6 ---
 
6 
• Complying with all applicable advance notice and fair hearing requirements at 42 CFR § 
435.917 and 42 CFR Part 431, Subpart E. 
•  
Q9: Does the end of the Secretary-declared COVID-19 public health emergency (COVID-
19 PHE) on May 11, 2023, have implications for states that had suspended Medicaid 
premiums via a disaster relief state plan amendment (SPA)? 
 
A9: Yes. The end of the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE  on May 11, 2023 means that all 
state disaster relief SPAs that sunset at the end of that COVID-19 PHE sunsetted on May 11, 
2023. 
 
After these disaster relief SPAs sunset, states must resume imposing Medicaid premiums 
consistent with their state plan unless they take action to delay or cancel the resumption of 
premiums. This is because states are generally required to implement the policies documented in 
their Medicaid state plan, unless the state takes permissible action to adopt a different policy.4 
States’ options for delaying or canceling resumption of premiums after a disaster relief SPA 
sunsets are discussed in Q11 below. 
  
Q10: After April 1, 2023, but before the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE ended, could 
states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase resume charging Medicaid 
premiums that had been suspended via a disaster relief SPA that sunsets at the end of this 
PHE? 
 
A10: Yes, subject to certain requirements and conditions, states claiming the FFCRA temporary 
FMAP increase that suspended premiums via a disaster relief SPA that sunset at the end of the 
Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE could resume charging premiums on or after April 1, 2023, 
but before the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE ended.  States that resumed charging 
Medicaid premiums before the sunset date of a disaster relief SPA must have complied with the 
general requirements described in Q8, and the beneficiary protections described in Q12. To 
resume Medicaid premiums that were suspended, the state should have rescinded the premium 
suspension provision of the relevant disaster relief SPA by submitting a section 7.4.A rescission 
SPA. Please see additional information from the February 14, 2023 All State Call here: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/downloads/covid19allstatecall02142023.pdf.  
If the state is claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase on or after April 1, 2023, it must 
also comply with the amended condition at section 6008(b)(2) of the FFCRA (as described in Q8 
and in the last paragraph of this FAQ response). 
 
When submitting a rescission SPA, a state must comply with the following general SPA 
submission requirements:5 
                                                          
4 See previous guidance on the resumption of Medicaid premiums after the sunset of disaster relief SPAs in the first 
paragraph of the response to Q24 of: CMS. (2022). COVID-19 Public Health Emergency Unwinding Frequently 
Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies. Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-
guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf. 
5 As CMS has previously informed states, the Medicaid disaster relief SPA template and related section 1135 
waivers and modifications of the above-listed SPA submission requirements are not available for state plan changes 
 



--- PAGE 7 ---
 
7 
• Public notice requirements at 42 CFR § 447.57(c);  
• SPA effective date requirements at 42 CFR § 430.20; and 
• Tribal consultation requirements at section 1902(a)(73) of the Act. 
 
A state wishing to rescind the relevant section of a disaster relief SPA prior to the disaster relief 
SPA’s sunset date may contact its CMS state lead for assistance. 
As indicated in Q8, States claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase on or after April 1, 
2023 must comply with the amended condition in section 6008(b)(2) of the FFCRA; thus, if such 
states resume premiums, they must ensure that the resumed premium schedule amounts do not 
exceed the amounts in effect as of January 1, 2020. 
 
Q11: How may states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase further delay 
resumption of Medicaid premium charges when a disaster relief SPA sunsets, or eliminate 
premium charges entirely? 
 
A11: States that wish to delay the resumption of Medicaid premiums after the sunset of disaster 
relief SPAs at the end of the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE on May 11, 2023, have several 
options. If a state wants to delay resumption of premiums temporarily (such as for a year or less 
after the end of the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE), it can either: 
(1) submit a Section 7.4.B or 7.4.C SPA to temporarily extend a disaster relief SPA provision for 
a limited period of time following the end of the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE;6 or  
(2) request authority under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act to delay the resumption of 
Medicaid premiums during the unwinding period until a full redetermination is completed for 
beneficiaries who are subject to premiums. States that want to remove premium requirements for 
more than a year after the end of the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE should consult their 
state lead. 
 
States submitting premium-related SPAs must comply with the general requirements described 
in Q8 and general submission requirements described in Q10.  
 
                                                          
that would restrict or limit payment, services, or eligibility, or otherwise burden beneficiaries and providers. See 
https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-center/downloads/medicaid-disaster-relief-spa-instructions.pdf and 
https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/downloads/covid19allstatecall02142023.pdf. Therefore, states should 
follow the regular SPA submission process and requirements when rescinding a suspension of premiums. 
Additionally, section 1135 waivers and modifications of the above-listed SPA submission requirements are not 
available with regard to disaster relief SPAs for COVID-19 submitted on or after April 10, 2023.  House Joint 
Resolution 7 (H.J. Res. 7), signed into law on April 10, 2023, ended the COVID-19 Presidential National 
Emergency declaration effective immediately.  Enactment of H.J. Res. 7 also ended CMS’s authority to issue new, 
prospective section 1135 waivers related to the COVID-19 pandemic.  Because section 1135 waivers and 
modifications of the above-listed SPA submission requirements apply to the date that the state submits the SPA, 
they are not available for disaster relief SPAs related to COVID-19 submitted on or after April 10, 2023.  See 
https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-center/downloads/cib050823.pdf.  
6 See discussion on extending disaster relief SPAs at Q26 of: CMS. (2022). COVID-19 Public Health Emergency 
Unwinding Frequently Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies. Available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf.  
 



--- PAGE 8 ---
 
8 
States may refer to SHO #22-0017 for details on how to request approval of section 
1902(e)(14)(A) waivers. States may also contact their CMS state lead for more information.8 
States requesting a section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver aren’t required to complete public notice 
requirements, but CMS encourages states to maintain public transparency.  CMS is providing 
public information on approved section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers in a chart available to the public 
here: https://www.medicaid.gov/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-
approvals/index.html. 
 
Q12: Which beneficiary protections are states required to provide, such as conducting a 
redetermination of eligibility, prior to resuming Medicaid premium charges that had been 
suspended during the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE or increasing a Medicaid 
beneficiary’s premiums after April 1, 2023? 
 
A12: All states must provide certain beneficiary protections prior to resuming premiums that 
were suspended during the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE or increasing an individual 
Medicaid beneficiary’s premium after April 1, 2023. States must: 
 
• Ensure that a determination of the beneficiary’s income has been made within the 
previous 12 months.9 This means that: 
• If the state has completed a renewal for the beneficiary in the last 12 months, the state 
may resume or increase Medicaid premiums for that beneficiary without completing a 
redetermination.  
• If the state hasn’t completed a renewal for the beneficiary in the last 12 months, the 
state must complete a redetermination before resuming or increasing Medicaid 
premiums for that beneficiary. 
 
• Comply with the general requirements described in Q8. 
 
If submitting a SPA, the state must comply with the SPA submission requirements described in 
Q10. States claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase must also ensure that their premium 
schedule amounts do not exceed the amounts in effect as of January 1, 2020, as discussed in Q8. 
 
                                                          
7 CMS. (March 3, 2022). Promoting Continuity of Coverage and Distributing Eligibility and Enrollment Workload 
in Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Upon 
Conclusion of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency [State Health Official Letter #22-001]. Available at  
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/sho22001.pdf.  
8 See discussion on requesting a 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver at Q27: CMS. (2022). COVID-19 Public Health Emergency 
Unwinding Frequently Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies. Available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf.  
9 See previous guidance regarding redetermination requirements prior to resumption of Medicaid premiums, 
including individualized notice requirements and when a state must obtain updated income information before 
reinstatement, at the first paragraph of Q24 and at Q25 of: CMS. (2022). COVID-19 Public Health Emergency 
Unwinding Frequently Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies. Available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf.  
 



--- PAGE 9 ---
 
9 
Q13: Can a state claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase for a quarter beginning 
on or after April 1, 2023, make changes to its Medicaid premium schedule before January 
1, 2024? 
 
A13: It depends. States claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase may submit a SPA to 
change the Medicaid premium schedule to reduce premium amounts or exempt additional 
populations from premium requirements. States submitting such a SPA must generally comply 
with SPA submission requirements, as described in Q10. Additionally, consistent with previous 
guidance, states claiming the temporary FFCRA FMAP increase may adopt new premiums 
before January 1, 2024, for new optional eligibility groups.10 
 
However, until January 1, 2024, states claiming the temporary FFCRA FMAP increase may not 
increase the amounts in their Medicaid premium schedules over the amounts in place for each 
eligibility group subject to premiums as of January 1, 2020. For example, if all beneficiaries in a 
certain eligibility group with household income at or over 200 percent of the federal poverty 
level (FPL) were charged premiums of $10 per month as of January 1, 2020, a state claiming the 
temporary FFCRA FMAP increase cannot increase the premium amount charged to beneficiaries 
in that eligibility group with household income at 200 percent of the FPL to any amount greater 
than $10 prior to January 1, 2024. If a state wishes to increase premium amounts above the 
amounts in place for any eligibility group as of January 1, 2020, it must forgo claiming the 
temporary FFCRA FMAP increase.11 
 
States making changes to premiums must also comply with general requirements described in 
Q8.  
Q14: Beginning April 1, 2023, can a state claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase 
disenroll Medicaid beneficiaries for failure to pay premiums? 
 
A14: Yes, with some limitations. Now that the FFCRA section 6008(b)(3) continuous enrollment 
condition has ended, states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase may resume 
implementation of a policy to disenroll some beneficiaries who haven’t paid Medicaid premiums 
for at least 60 days, provided that conditions specified at 42 CFR § 447.55(b)(2) are met and the 
state’s disenrollment policy was in place as of January 1, 2020.12  
 
                                                          
10 See discussion of the permissibility of charging Medicaid premiums for new optional eligibility groups at 
FAQ#II.B.13 of: CMS. (2021). COVID-19 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for State Medicaid and Children’s 
Health Insurance Program (CHIP) Agencies. Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-
center/downloads/covid-19-faqs.pdf. Please note that the last two sentences of FAQ#II.B.13 are no longer applicable 
on and after April 1, 2023, the effective date of the CAA, 2023 amendments to section 6008(b)(2) and 6008(b)(3) of 
the FFCRA. 
11 Please note that the FPL level and premium amount included in this example are hypothetical only.  
12 Previous guidance indicated that states may terminate enrollment for failure to pay after the last day of the month 
in which the COVID-19 PHE ends. This document updates that guidance to reflect the amendments to FFCRA 
section 6008 delinking the end of the continuous enrollment condition from the end of the COVID-19 PHE. See 
discussion at FAQ#II.B.7 of: CMS. (2021). COVID-19 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for State Medicaid and 
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) Agencies. Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-
center/downloads/covid-19-faqs.pdf. 



--- PAGE 10 ---
 
10 
However, adoption of a new policy (i.e., after January 1, 2020) to disenroll a beneficiary for 
failure to pay Medicaid premiums would constitute a more restrictive eligibility standard, 
methodology, or procedure under section 6008(b)(1) of the FFCRA for any eligibility group that 
the state covered as of January 1, 2020. Thus, new adoption of such a policy prior to January 1, 
2024 for such eligibility groups would be a violation of the FFCRA section 6008(b)(1) condition. 
Therefore, states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase cannot implement a policy to 
disenroll a beneficiary for failure to pay Medicaid premiums if that beneficiary is enrolled in an 
eligibility group that the state covered as of January 1, 2020, unless that disenrollment policy for 
that eligibility group was documented in the state plan pursuant to 42 CFR § 447.55(c)(4) as of 
January 1, 2020. States that are claiming the temporary FFCRA FMAP increase can adopt a new 
policy to disenroll such beneficiaries for failure to pay Medicaid premiums after December 31, 
2023, when the condition under section 6008(b)(1) of the FFCRA will end. 
 
Prior to disenrolling a beneficiary for failure to pay Medicaid premiums, states must: 
 
• Consider whether the beneficiary is eligible on all bases prior to making a determination of 
ineligibility and disenrolling the beneficiary; 
• Ensure all beneficiary protections described in Q12; and 
• Comply with all general requirements listed in Q8.  
 
Although the continuous enrollment condition has ended, states cannot disenroll beneficiaries for 
unpaid premium charges accumulated during the period when the continuous enrollment 
condition was in effect. Similarly, states may not count any days that occurred during the period 
the continuous enrollment condition was in effect toward the minimum 60-day period of non-
payment required under 42 CFR § 447.55(b)(2) before taking action to disenroll a beneficiary 
based on non-payment of premiums.13 States may disenroll beneficiaries for unpaid premiums 
incurred prior to the beginning of the continuous enrollment condition on March 18, 2020, as 
long as no dates between March 18, 2020, and March 31, 2023 are counted toward the minimum 
60 days. Additionally, states may not count any days that occurred during any period that 
Medicaid premiums were suspended via a disaster relief SPA. CMS encourages states not to 
count days of nonpayment accumulated prior to March 18, 2020, given the lengthy time period 
that has passed since that date and the difficulty individuals may have documenting payments 
made that long ago. 
                                                          
13 Previous guidance indicated that states may terminate enrollment for failure to pay after the last day of the month 
in which the COVID-19 PHE ends. Although the underlying policy described in that guidance was primarily based 
on the continuous enrollment condition at FFCRA section 6008(b)(3), the FAQs referred broadly to the COVID-19 
PHE when discussing the period during which that condition applied. This document updates that guidance to reflect 
the amendments to FFCRA section 6008 delinking the end of the continuous enrollment condition from the end of 
the COVID-19 PHE. Additionally, although not referenced in that previous guidance, the condition at section 
6008(b)(1) is also applicable if states claiming the FFCRA temporary FMAP increase newly adopt a policy to 
terminate beneficiary enrollment for failure to pay Medicaid premiums, for beneficiaries in an eligibility group that 
the state covered as of January 1, 2020, as discussed above.  See discussion at FAQ#II.B.7-8 and 11 of: CMS 
COVID-19 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for State Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program 
(CHIP) Agencies. (2021). Available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/state-resource-center/downloads/covid-19-
faqs.pdf. See also further discussion at Q30 of: CMS. (2022). COVID-19 Public Health Emergency Unwinding 
Frequently Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies. Available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf. 
 



--- PAGE 11 ---
 
11 
CHIP Resumption of Premiums 
 
Q15: If a state suspended the collection of premiums for separate CHIP enrollees during 
the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE through a CHIP disaster SPA, may it resume 
collection of premiums during the unwinding period?  
 
A15: It depends. States that suspended CHIP premiums during the Secretary-declared COVID-
19 PHE may resume the collection of premiums only for beneficiaries who have had a full 
renewal within the last 12 months.14 The amount of the premium imposed should be based on the 
state’s most recent determination of the beneficiary’s household income. Additionally, the state 
may resume collecting premiums only after providing timely and adequate written notice and 
information about the beneficiary’s rights to the CHIP review process. 
 
If a beneficiary hasn’t had a redetermination of household income in the last 12 months, the state 
must complete a redetermination before reimposing premiums. 
 
If a state wishes to resume premiums, but has not completed a renewal for all beneficiaries in the 
past 12 months, it will need to have flexibilities authorized through a CHIP disaster relief SPA or 
disaster relief SPA activation letter in place because the state will be following its state plan 
policies (i.e., charging premiums) for only a subset of beneficiaries (those that have had a 
redetermination in the last 12 months). See Q17 for a discussion of the disaster relief flexibilities 
needed in this situation. 
 
Disaster flexibilities authorized through a CHIP disaster relief SPA or disaster relief SPA 
activation letter are not needed to resume the collection of premiums in states that have 
completed renewals for all individuals in the last 12 months. 
 
Q16: If a state continued to collect premiums for separate CHIP enrollees during the 
Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE but did not terminate coverage for anyone for failure 
to pay premiums during this time, may the state begin terminating coverage for failure to 
pay premiums during the unwinding period? 
 
A16: It depends. A state may only terminate an individual’s coverage for failure to pay 
premiums during the unwinding period if the individual has had a full renewal within the last 12 
months.   The state must also provide beneficiaries with timely and adequate written notice and 
information about their rights to the CHIP review process prior to resuming the premium grace 
period policy and terminating the individual for failure to pay premiums.  As a reminder, states 
are required by section 2103(e)(3) of the Act to provide enrollees with a minimum 30-day grace 
period to pay any required premiums or enrollment fees before termination of coverage.  
 
If a beneficiary hasn’t had a redetermination of household income in the last 12 months, the state 
must complete a redetermination before terminating for failure to pay premiums.  
 
                                                          
14 See discussion of resuming the collection of premiums at Q25 of: COVID-19 Public Health Emergency 
Unwinding Frequently Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies. CMS. (2022).  Available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf.  



--- PAGE 12 ---
 
12 
If a state wishes to resume terminations of coverage for failure to pay premiums, but has not 
completed a renewal for all beneficiaries in the past 12 months, it will need to have flexibilities 
authorized through a CHIP disaster relief SPA or disaster relief SPA activation letter in place 
because the state will be following its state plan policies (i.e., terminating for failure to pay 
premiums) for only a subset of beneficiaries (those that have had a redetermination in the last 12 
months). See Q17 for a discussion of the disaster relief flexibilities needed in this situation. 
 
Disaster flexibilities authorized through a CHIP disaster relief SPA or disaster relief SPA 
activation letter are not needed to resume terminations of coverage for failure to pay premiums in 
states that have completed renewals for all individuals in the last 12 months. 
 
Q17: What authority do states need to resume their CHIP premium policies (e.g., charging 
premiums or terminating for failure to pay premiums) if only a subset of CHIP 
beneficiaries has had a renewal in the past 12 months?  
 
A17: For states with an Evergreen Disaster Relief SPA, the state must submit to CMS a disaster 
SPA activation letter specifying the date when the state will resume their CHIP state plan 
premium policy (e.g., charging premiums or terminating for failure to pay premiums) for those 
beneficiaries who have completed a renewal within the last 12 months. The letter should also 
specify that the state will resume the CHIP state plan premium policy on a rolling basis as 
renewals are conducted through the state’s COVID-19 PHE unwinding period and specify the 
state’s COVID-19 PHE unwinding period end date. 
 
For states with a disaster relief SPA that was specific to the Secretary-declared COVID-19 PHE, 
the state must submit to CMS either: 
1. A SPA specific to the unwinding period, stating the state will resume its CHIP state plan 
premium policies for those beneficiaries who have completed a renewal within the last 12 
months; or 
2. An Evergreen Disaster Relief SPA. In the SPA cover letter, the state should describe how 
it will resume its CHIP state plan premium policies during the unwinding period. 
 
Renewals for Individuals Receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) in Section 1634 
States 
 
Q18: Are states with an agreement with the Social Security Administration (SSA) under 
section 1634 of the Act (also known as a “1634 state”) required to conduct regular renewals 
for individuals eligible for Medicaid based on receipt of SSI? 
 
A18: It depends. While there is no exception for conducting regular renewals for any populations 
under regulations at 42 CFR § 435.916, states that have an agreement with the SSA under section 
1634 of the Act (“1634 agreement”) do not need to take affirmative steps to renew Medicaid for 
individuals who continue to receive SSI. Such individuals remain eligible for Medicaid based on 
their continued receipt of SSI as described at 42 CFR § 435.120. States with section 1634 
agreements can rely on information provided through the State Data Exchange (or “SDX”) to 
renew on an ex-parte basis individuals who continue to receive SSI. Once SSA has notified a 
state through the SDX that a given individual is receiving SSI and eligible for Medicaid on that 



--- PAGE 13 ---
 
13 
basis, SSA does not transmit additional information about that individual unless their 
circumstances have changed.  Thus, states with 1634 agreements may rely on the original 
information provided through the SDX that the individual is receiving SSI and eligible for 
Medicaid on that basis until they receive new information through the SDX reflecting a change 
in circumstances. 
 
If new information for an SSI recipient indicating a change in circumstances is received through 
the SDX, states are required to process the change in accordance with 42 CFR § 435.916(d). 
States must redetermine eligibility for these individuals on all bases, in accordance with 42 CFR 
§§ 435.916(f) and 435.930, before terminating coverage. When acting on the change, if the state 
doesn’t have sufficient information to determine eligibility on another basis, the state must 
collect the information needed to consider eligibility on other bases.  
 
Data Sharing 
Q19: Under what circumstances may states share beneficiary information, including 
renewal dates, with enrolled Medicaid and CHIP providers (such as nursing facilities and 
Indian health care providers) without violating Medicaid and CHIP confidentiality 
standards under section 1902(a)(7)(A) of the Act, 42 CFR part 431, subpart F, and 42 CFR 
§ 457.1110(b)? 
 
A19: Under section 1902(a)(7) of the Act and implementing regulations at 42 CFR part 431, 
subpart F, states must restrict the use or disclosure of information concerning Medicaid 
applicants and beneficiaries to purposes directly connected with the administration of the state 
plan.  The same requirements also apply to separate CHIPs through a cross reference at 42 CFR 
§ 457.1110(b). The state Medicaid or CHIP agency’s disclosure of beneficiary data (e.g., 
beneficiary renewal dates) to an enrolled Medicaid or CHIP provider to enable the provider to 
give information about renewals to beneficiary patients and/or to encourage a patient to complete 
a renewal is a purpose directly related to the administration of the Medicaid or CHIP state plan.  
Such activities support establishing eligibility—one of the purposes directly related to state plan 
administration listed at 42 CFR § 431.302(a). Thus, the state Medicaid or CHIP agency may 
disclose beneficiary data to an enrolled provider so that the provider can assist the beneficiary in 
completing their renewal, without violating Medicaid and CHIP confidentiality standards under 
section 1902(a)(7)(A) of the Act, 42 CFR part 431, subpart F, and 42 CFR § 457.1110(b). Thus, 
any type of enrolled provider might be able to encourage and assist its patients to complete 
renewals, including nursing facilities, Federally Qualified Health Centers, hospitals, Indian 
health care providers, and others.  Any enrolled provider receiving information concerning 
beneficiaries must be subject to standards of confidentiality that are comparable to those of the 
state agency, per 42 CFR § 431.306(b). For states seeking to make such disclosures, each data 
element disclosed must be consistent with a purpose that is directly connected to the 
administration of the Medicaid or CHIP state plan. 
 
States are typically required to seek consent from beneficiaries or a beneficiary’s personal 
representative before making a disclosure of beneficiary data to an outside source under 42 CFR 
§ 431.306(d).  However, the state Medicaid or CHIP agency would not be required to seek 
consent prior to sharing a beneficiary’s information with an enrolled Medicaid or CHIP provider 
to enable the provider to encourage a patient to complete a renewal or assist a beneficiary in 



--- PAGE 14 ---
 
14 
completing their renewal if these activities are authorized under a written agreement between the 
provider and the state.  In such circumstances, the enrolled provider is assisting the agency in a 
purpose directly related to the administration of the Medicaid or CHIP state plan, as expressly 
authorized by the Medicaid or CHIP agency, and thus would not be considered to be an “outside 
source.”  We note that while advance consent is not required under Medicaid or CHIP 
regulations at § 431.306(d) or § 457.1110 in these circumstances, state or other laws may require 
such consent. 
 
States should review current agreements with enrolled providers to evaluate if they authorize the 
provider to use beneficiary data from the state to support beneficiaries in maintaining Medicaid 
or CHIP coverage.  States should also review current agreements with enrolled providers to 
evaluate if they include applicable Medicaid and CHIP confidentiality requirements and 
restrictions on the use of information regarding beneficiaries. States should make modifications 
to current agreements with enrolled providers, if needed.  
In summary, it would be consistent with section 1902(a)(7) of the Act and implementing 
regulations at 42 CFR part 431, subpart F and 42 CFR § 457.1110(b) for a state Medicaid or 
CHIP agency to share Medicaid or CHIP beneficiaries’ information with an enrolled Medicaid or 
CHIP provider so that the provider can help patients maintain coverage, subject to a written 
agreement (e.g., the provider agreement) with the state agency authorizing such data sharing and 
activities. States should confer with their counsel to ensure compliance with otherwise applicable 
law when sharing this information. 
 
States can also partner with managed care plans to conduct outreach to their enrollees. For 
information on requirements and limitations relating to states’ partnership with managed care 
plans during unwinding, see: “Strategic Approaches to Engaging Managed Care Plans to 
Maximize Continuity of Coverage as States Resume Normal Eligibility and Enrollment 
Operations,” available at https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/downloads/health-plan-
strategy.pdf. 
Former Foster Care Child Group 1115 Authority 
 
Q20: Is section 1115 authority needed to enroll individuals in the Medicaid state plan 
group for former foster care children (“FFCC group”) who meet all eligibility criteria for 
the group, but who turned 18 prior to January 1, 2023, and may be eligible for another 
mandatory eligibility group? 
 
A20: Prior to enactment of the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid 
Recovery and Treatment for Patients and Communities (“SUPPORT”) Act, Pub. L. 115-271, 
enacted on October 24, 2018, eligibility for the FFCC group under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX) 
of the Social Security Act excluded individuals who had been placed in foster care in another 
state when they reached age 18 and aged out of such foster care as well as individuals who are 
eligible for another mandatory group described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Act (other 
than the adult group, described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of the Act). Section 1002(a)(1) 
of the SUPPORT Act revised section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX) of the Act to remove these 
limitations on eligibility for individuals who reach age 18 on or after January 1, 2023. This 
frequently asked question addresses the eligibility exclusion related to eligibility for other 



--- PAGE 15 ---
 
15 
mandatory eligibility groups, which continues to be in effect for individuals who turned age 18 
prior to January 1, 2023. 
  
Although the statutory change that enables states to enroll individuals in the FFCC group even if 
they are eligible for another mandatory group (other than the adult group) applies only to 
individuals who reached age 18 on or after January 1, 2023, as a practical matter, states would 
rarely be required to apply the eligibility exclusion to individuals who reached age 18 prior to 
January 1, 2023.  These individuals formerly in foster care might meet the requirements for 
another mandatory eligibility group if: (1) they are receiving supplemental security income 
(SSI), have a disability and are in a 209(b) state (whether or not they are receiving SSI), or are 
pregnant or a parent or caretaker relative; and (2) they meet the financial eligibility requirements 
applicable to such individuals.  If an individual who turned 18 prior to January 1, 2023 and has 
aged out of foster care applies for Medicaid and the state has all information it needs to 
determine eligibility for one of these other mandatory eligibility groups, it would need to do so 
and enroll the individual in the appropriate group. (If the individual is receiving SSI and is in a 
1634 state, the enrollment will have already occurred.) 
 
However, except for SSI beneficiaries in non-209(b) states, states generally are not able to 
determine that an applicant to the FFCC group is eligible for another mandatory group described 
in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Act based on the information in the application the state 
received.  This inability is because determining eligibility for such mandatory groups would 
generally require that states collect additional information about the individual’s income and 
household beyond the information needed to determine eligibility in the FFCC group.  Gathering 
this additional information would create an unnecessary administrative burden for both the 
individual and the state with no value for the individual since the FFCC group provides full 
benefits. Moreover, with no income or asset test, the annual renewal of eligibility for individuals 
enrolled in the FFCC group can usually be achieved on an ex parte basis until the individual 
reaches age 26, vastly simplifying retention of coverage as compared to enrollment in another 
mandatory eligibility group. 
 
As such, CMS has determined that states do not need to seek section 1115 authority to enroll 
individuals who turned 18 prior to January 1, 2023, in the state plan FFCC group even if the 
individual has a disability, is pregnant or is a parent or caretaker relative and might be eligible on 
one of those bases. (SSI beneficiaries in non-209(b) states will already be enrolled in Medicaid 
by the Social Security Administration through a state’s 1634 Agreement, or, in SSI “criteria” 
states, will clearly have a separate basis for mandatory eligibility.)  States do not need to collect 
more information than necessary to enroll people in the FFCC eligibility group. However, if a 
state has all information needed to determine that an applicant who is a former foster care child 
and who turned 18 before January 1, 2023, is eligible for another mandatory eligibility group 
(other than the adult group), the state should enroll the individual in that other group.  If a state 
has information indicating that a beneficiary enrolled in the FFCC group is potentially eligible 
for another mandatory eligibility group (other than the adult group), the state must provide the 
individual with an informed choice and attempt to collect the information needed to determine 
eligibility for that group. 
 
