

--- PAGE 1 ---
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
7500 Security Boulevard, Mail Stop S2-26-12 
Baltimore, Maryland  21244-1850 
 
CMCS Informational Bulletin 
DATE:  
November 14, 2024 
FROM:  
Daniel Tsai, Deputy Administrator and Director 
Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services 
SUBJECT:  Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements 
to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes 
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is committed to protecting access to 
health care for individuals enrolled in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program 
(CHIP) in a manner that ensures eligible individuals maintain enrollment and protects the 
integrity of these programs. This Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services (CMCS) Informational 
Bulletin (CIB) is part of a series of guidance supporting states’ efforts to verify eligibility and 
conduct renewals in compliance with federal requirements. This CIB specifically provides states 
with guidance regarding the continued use of certain streamlined eligibility and enrollment 
strategies that CMS made available to states to address challenges brought on by the COVID-19 
Public Health Emergency (PHE) and the return to regular Medicaid and CHIP renewal 
operations following the end of the Medicaid continuous enrollment condition under section 
6008(b)(3) of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) (P.L. 116-127).1 With the 
expiration of the continuous enrollment condition, states were required to resume renewals, 
including disenrolling individuals who were no longer eligible, for all individuals enrolled in 
their Medicaid programs. This undertaking has also commonly been referred to as the Medicaid 
“unwinding” process.  
During unwinding, CMS provided strategies to states, including waivers authorized under 
section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Social Security Act (the Act) (hereinafter “unwinding-related 
section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers strategies”) and other regulatory flexibilities, that have been 
critical to states’ ability to ensure eligible individuals retain coverage, to transition those no 
longer eligible to other Insurance Affordability Programs (IAPs), and to reduce administrative 
burden on states and beneficiaries. On May 9, 2024, CMS released the “Extension of Temporary 
Unwinding-Related Flexibilities” CIB (“May 9, 2024, CIB”), which announced that all 
unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers and CMS’s concurrence with states’ use of 
other unwinding-related flexibilities authorized under federal regulations would be extended 
through June 30, 2025, if the terms and conditions of the original waiver continue to be met.2  
Since publishing the May 9, 2024, CIB, and as states continue conducting eligibility renewals, 
CMS evaluated the potential for making permanent each of the unwinding-related section 
1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies in order to support state efforts to sustain and build upon 
improvements to their eligibility and enrollment systems. In this CIB, CMS outlines which of 
these strategies states may continue long-term at state option under Medicaid or CHIP state plan 
authority, which strategies will be required under recent changes to Medicaid and CHIP 
regulations, and which strategies will sunset after June 30, 2025. More information regarding 
 
1 Throughout the COVID-19 PHE, states adopted many flexibilities to respond effectively to issues caused by the 
pandemic and to comply with conditions for receipt of a temporary 6.2 percentage point federal medical assistance 
percentage (FMAP) increase set forth at section 6008 of the FFCRA. One of these conditions, the continuous 
enrollment condition, required states to maintain the enrollment of nearly all Medicaid beneficiaries through March 
31, 2023. FFCRA (P.L. 116-127) as amended by CAA, 2023 (P.L. 117-328, Section 5131 of division FF, title V). 
2 CMS, CIB, “Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities,” May 9, 2024, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
how states may request authority to continue use of a strategy whose blanket approval is 
sunsetting after June 30, 2025, is included later in this CIB.  
Table of Contents 
I. 
Use of Eligibility and Enrollment Strategies During Unwinding ...................................... 2 
II. 
The Future of Unwinding-Related Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver 
Strategies ............................................................................................................................ 3 
A. Strategies Related to Verifying Financial Eligibility ................................................... 4 
1. Using Gross Income Determinations from SNAP and Other 
Human Services Programs ..................................................................................... 5 
2. Options to Complete Ex Parte Renewal When No Data Sources 
Return Income Information, Including the Zero-Dollar and 100 
Percent FPL Income Strategies .............................................................................. 7 
3. Strategy to Streamline Use of Asset Verification System (AVS) ........................... 9 
B. Discontinued Blanket Authority for Unwinding-Related 
1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies ............................................................................. 10 
III. 
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations: State Options to Delay 
Procedural Disenrollments ............................................................................................... 10 
IV. 
Eligibility System Changes .............................................................................................. 11 
V. 
Closing ............................................................................................................................. 11 
Appendix: Continued Availability of Certain Strategies Based on Unwinding-
Related Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers Beyond June 30, 2025 ........................... 12 
 
I. 
Use of Eligibility and Enrollment Strategies During Unwinding  
The Medicaid unwinding process presented major challenges for states and individuals renewing 
their coverage. States were required to process an unprecedented volume of renewals as they 
resumed eligibility and enrollment activities, while millions of beneficiaries were required to 
navigate renewals and potential disenrollment for the first time in as long as three years. These 
conditions created significant operational challenges for states’ income and eligibility 
determination systems as well as for beneficiaries.  
To address these issues, CMS and states worked expeditiously to identify strategies that could 
mitigate emerging issues in a manner that helped eligible individuals successfully renew their 
coverage. These strategies included measures allowed by (1) waivers granted under section 
1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act, which permits CMS to approve time-limited waivers of any 
provisions of titles XIX and XXI of the Act “as are necessary to ensure that states establish 
income and eligibility determination systems that protect beneficiaries,” and (2) the use of 
regulatory flexibility under 42 C.F.R. § 435.912(e), which provides an exception to the 
timeliness standards for processing applications and renewals in unusual circumstances.  
Since April 2022, CMS granted over 400 unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers to 
52 states and territories that enabled them to streamline different parts of their renewal processes 
in support of their unwinding efforts.3 A combined 50 states and territories received over 200 
waiver approvals to adopt strategies to increase ex parte renewal4 rates, thereby minimizing 
 
3 CMS, “COVID-19 PHE Unwinding Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Approvals,” October 30, 2024, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/unwinding-and-returning-
regular-operations-after-covid-19/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-approvals/index.html. 
4 An ex parte renewal is a renewal that results from a state having available, reliable information that is sufficient to 
determine continued eligibility without requiring information from the individual. Ex parte renewal is also known as 
auto-renewal, passive renewal, or administrative renewal. Per 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1), states must begin a 
beneficiary’s renewal process by first attempting an ex parte renewal.  



--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
administrative burdens for states and beneficiaries while supporting eligible individuals’ ability 
to renew their coverage. Thirty states received waiver approvals to better support beneficiaries 
with renewal form submission or completion. CMS approved waivers in 45 states that facilitated 
their ability to streamline updating beneficiary contact information with information from trusted 
sources, minimizing coverage losses due to states’ inability to reach people. Twenty states used 
waivers to ensure the reinstatement of eligible individuals who had been disenrolled for 
procedural reasons. 
States invested considerable time and resources to adopt these strategies, which together 
streamlined eligibility and enrollment processes, protecting eligible individuals from being 
disenrolled while alleviating administrative and operational burdens on beneficiaries as well as 
state systems and staff. As signaled in prior guidance, CMS reviewed all section 1902(e)(14)(A) 
waiver strategies to determine which could be implemented on a longstanding basis under other 
authorities.5 CMS outlines below which of these strategies may be continued at state option 
under existing state pan authority, will be required under recent rulemaking, and will sunset after 
June 30, 2025. 
II. 
The Future of Unwinding-Related Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
Receiving input from states, beneficiaries, and other stakeholders that these strategies 
meaningfully improved efforts to renew eligible people’s coverage, CMS reviewed strategies 
made available during unwinding to determine whether states could continue using these 
strategies under existing federal statutory or regulatory authorities to strengthen and streamline 
renewal systems on a long-term basis. Federal renewal and verification requirements in 42 C.F.R. 
§§ 435.916, 435.940 – 435.965, and 457.380 seek to ensure that eligible individuals retain 
coverage and ineligible individuals are properly disenrolled from Medicaid and CHIP and 
transitioned to other sources of coverage, as appropriate. Thus, in evaluating statutory and 
regulatory authorities, CMS considered the importance of enabling states to support both of these 
goals. CMS contemplated the extent to which these strategies support the retention of eligible 
beneficiaries by minimizing administrative burden and disenrollment of likely eligible 
individuals for procedural reasons (e.g., failure to complete a renewal form or provide other 
paperwork). CMS also considered how the strategies may affect the state’s responsibility to 
identify ineligible individuals who should be disenrolled from Medicaid and CHIP and referred 
to other IAPs, as appropriate. To augment our statutory and regulatory analysis, CMS reviewed 
available studies to assess these potential program integrity risks.   
CMS determined that states either have the option to continue or will be required by recent 
rulemaking to implement over half of the unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver 
strategies under their state plan in accordance with statutory and regulatory authorities. Several 
strategies were codified in regulation by the “Streamlining the Medicaid, Children’s Health 
Insurance Program, and Basic Health Program Application, Eligibility Determination, and 
Renewal Processes” final rule, which appeared in the Federal Register on April 2, 2024 
(hereinafter “April 2024 Eligibility and Enrollment Final Rule).6,7  
With the codification of these policies, states no longer need waiver authority to implement these 
strategies. Additionally, adoption of some strategies will be required as of the compliance date 
identified in the April 2024 Eligibility and Enrollment Final Rule. For example, by December 
2025, states are required to establish a process to obtain updated address information from 
reliable sources, including the National Change of Address service and mail returned by U.S. 
Postal Service with a forwarding address. CMS has also determined that some other strategies 
 
5 CMS, “Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities,” May 9, 2024, available at 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf 
6 CMS, Final Rule, “Medicaid Program; Streamlining the Medicaid, Children's Health Insurance Program, and Basic 
Health Program Application, Eligibility Determination, Enrollment, and Renewal Processes,” April 2, 2024, 
available at: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/04/02/2024-06566/medicaid-program-streamlining-
the-medicaid-childrens-health-insurance-program-and-basic-health.  
7 Changes to 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.608, 435.919, 436.608, and 457.344 implemented certain strategies regarding 
updating contact information that were previously approved under section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver authority. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
may be continued beyond June 30, 2025, under other state plan authorities in a materially similar 
way to the unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies currently in place in many 
states.  
During the unprecedented challenges brought on by the PHE and the subsequent unwinding, 
CMS and states worked together expeditiously to put in place measures that would prevent 
inappropriate coverage loss. Under such exigent circumstances and in the interest of protecting 
eligible beneficiaries, CMS approved waivers of program requirements in order for states to 
implement a variety of strategies under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act. With the benefit of 
understanding states’ experiences with these strategies during unwinding, CMS reviewed each of 
the unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies and existing statutory and 
regulatory authorities more closely and determined that some of these strategies are permissible 
at state option (some with and some without modification) without waiving any particular 
program requirements under section 1902(e)(14)(A). As such, those strategies may continue 
under existing statutory, regulatory, and state plan authorities. CMS also recognizes that states 
invested substantial time and resources in adopting these strategies and engaged in planning that 
took into account the potential continued availability of those strategies as CMS determined 
which could be implemented on a longstanding basis.8 
The appendix contains a description of each unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) wavier 
strategy, indicating whether the strategy may or must be continued and the necessary steps to do 
so, or if the blanket authority for the strategy sunsets on June 30, 2025.  
A. 
Strategies Related to Verifying Financial Eligibility 
This section of the CIB outlines how states may continue to implement the most commonly 
approved unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies related to verifying 
financial eligibility. Specifically, this section provides information on how states can implement 
existing verification policies to achieve long-term use of certain strategies related to income and 
resource verification. 
The unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies aimed at streamlining income 
and resource verification during the ex parte renewal process have been particularly effective in 
supporting states’ efforts to minimize the administrative burden associated with conducting 
renewals and preventing the improper disenrollment of eligible beneficiaries. CMS has 
determined that, subject to certain modifications and conditions, the following strategies may be 
adopted in accordance with the Medicaid statute and implementing regulations without a section 
1902(e)(14)(A) waiver:  
• Using gross income determinations from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP); 
• Completing an ex parte renewal when no data sources return income information 
(including both the “Zero-Dollar” and “100 Percent Federal Poverty Level (FPL)” 
strategies); and 
• Streamlining use of the asset verification system (AVS). 
CMS notes that throughout the following sections, “data sources” refers to those data sources a 
state uses to verify eligibility factors for Medicaid and identifies in its verification plan, as 
required by 42 C.F.R. § 435.945(j).9 
 
8 CMS, “Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities,” May 9, 2024, available at 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf 
9 In general, section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver authority is applicable to both Medicaid and CHIP under section 
2107(e)(1)(I) of the Act. However, CMS notes that certain financial strategies outlined in this section of the CIB 
may not apply to CHIP, either because the eligibility requirements related to the strategy do not apply to CHIP (e.g., 
the AVS strategy or Fair Hearing Timeframes Extension strategy), or relevant conditions do not apply to CHIP 
beneficiaries. States may contact their state CHIP officer if they are interested in applying these strategies to the 
CHIP population.  



--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
1. Using Gross Income Determinations from SNAP and Other Human Services Programs 
Under section 1137 of the Act and regulations at 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.948 and 435.952, states may 
use information from human services programs, such as SNAP and Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families (TANF), in a number of ways to facilitate Medicaid eligibility determinations 
and enrollment. To simplify the use of SNAP and/or TANF information when making eligibility 
determinations during unwinding, CMS used section 1902(e)(14)(A) authority to waive the 
requirement to make a Medicaid income determination at application or at renewal for 
individuals whose gross income determined by the state’s SNAP and/or TANF agency was at or 
below the applicable Medicaid income standard. During unwinding, this strategy protected 
beneficiaries by enabling states to enroll or renew coverage without unnecessary paperwork, 
reducing burden on both state eligibility staff and beneficiaries, and helping states increase the 
number of renewals that could be completed on an ex parte basis. 
When the blanket authority for unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies 
expires on June 30, 2025, states must resume making Medicaid income determinations and may 
generally no longer rely on the SNAP or TANF findings to make a Medicaid eligibility 
determination. However, states may use SNAP gross income to verify Modified Adjusted Gross 
Income (MAGI)-based income determinations.  
Section 1137 of the Act and implementing regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.948 identify the data 
sources states are required to access to the extent the state determines the source to be useful for 
verifying income in accordance with subpart G of 42 C.F.R. part 435. In determining usefulness, 
states are expected to consider such factors as the accuracy of the financial information, the 
timeliness of the information returned, the complexity of accessing the data or data source, the 
age of the financial records, the comprehensiveness of the data, any limitations imposed by the 
owner of the data on its use, as well as other relevant factors. No data source provides an 
individual’s current monthly MAGI-based income precisely. For example, federal tax 
information, although providing MAGI-based income, is typically one to two years old; quarterly 
wage data provides earnings over three months, which states use to approximate average 
monthly wage income, and only reflects wage income. Thus, states have to consider various 
factors in identifying the data sources they find useful to ensure both that individuals with 
income over the income standard are not approved or renewed for coverage, and that individuals 
with income at or below the income standard are not inappropriately denied or disenrolled from 
coverage.  
Section 1137 of the Act names SNAP as one of the data sources states must use, if useful, to 
verify income at application and/or renewal. However, statute and regulations do not identify the 
specific SNAP income data that must be used. Further, CMS regulations do not require that, to be 
useful, a verification data source provide data that matches the methodology used to determine 
income eligibility for Medicaid or CHIP. CMS believes it would be reasonable for states to use 
gross income calculated by the SNAP agency and/or the underlying data for specific types of 
income in an applicant’s or beneficiary’s SNAP record if, after considering the aforementioned 
factors, the state determines either or both to be useful for verifying income for Medicaid 
purposes.   
Generally, SNAP gross income is comprehensive and includes more income sources than would 
be counted in MAGI. This means that if someone’s SNAP gross income is below the applicable 
Medicaid standard, then their Medicaid MAGI is likely to be below the applicable standard as 
well. Studies have found that, despite differences in household composition and income-counting 
rules, the vast majority of non-elderly, non-disabled individuals who receive SNAP benefits are 
highly likely to be financially eligible for MAGI-based Medicaid.10 These studies provide further 
 
10 Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, “A Technical Assessment of SNAP and Medicaid Financial Eligibility 
Under the Affordable Care Act (ACA),” June 6, 2013, available at: https://www.cbpp.org/research/a-technical-
assessment-of-snap-and-medicaid-financial-eligibility-under-the-affordable-care;  
The Urban Institute, “Overlapping Eligibility and Enrollment: Human Services and Health Programs Under the 
Affordable Care Act,” December 23, 2013, available at: 
https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/migrated_legacy_files//44311/rpt_integrationproject.pdf. 



--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
support for state flexibility to determine that the gross income determination made by SNAP 
provides a reliable and useful source of information for purposes of verifying Medicaid income 
eligibility. Additionally, nearly three-quarters of SNAP households live at or below the poverty 
level,11 underscoring that there is a high likelihood that those who qualify for SNAP are also 
eligible for Medicaid. 
State Plan Strategy & Implementation Considerations 
States may use a gross income determination from SNAP, if determined useful, as a data source 
to verify MAGI-based income at application, at renewal, or both. As a counterexample, CMS 
does not believe that states could reasonably conclude that net income for purposes of SNAP 
eligibility is useful in verifying MAGI-based income, as the determination of net SNAP income 
involves deduction of several significant income disregards from the gross income amount (e.g., 
20 percent of earned income and shelter, utility and childcare expenses).  
Below are two examples describing how a state might implement use of SNAP gross income in 
verifying MAGI-based income for an individual applying for Medicaid and an individual whose 
Medicaid eligibility is being renewed.  
Example #1: In verifying the attested income of an individual applying for coverage on the 
basis of MAGI, a state electing this strategy could compare the individual’s MAGI-based 
attested household income to the gross income determined by SNAP for the individual’s 
SNAP household. If the MAGI-based attested household income is reasonably compatible 
with the individual’s SNAP gross income, the state would consider the attested household 
income information to be verified. If the SNAP gross income information is not reasonably 
compatible with the attested MAGI-based household income, the state would follow its 
verification plan to complete the verification process.12  
 
Example #2: When attempting an ex parte renewal, a state adopting this strategy for renewals 
would compare a beneficiary’s gross income, as determined by SNAP, to the applicable 
Medicaid income standard. If the beneficiary’s SNAP gross income is at or below the 
applicable income standard, the state would conclude that the beneficiary is income eligible 
for Medicaid. If SNAP gross income is above the applicable standard, the state would follow 
its verification plan to complete the verification process. The state cannot deny coverage 
solely based on the SNAP gross income.13 
 
Based on a state’s assessment of the reliability and usefulness of SNAP gross income in verifying 
income and supporting the interests of ensuring ineligible individuals are not enrolled and 
eligible individuals are not denied coverage, states may also target this strategy to specific 
populations. For example, a state could opt to use the strategy only for individuals whose SNAP 
program gross income is at or below a specified level (e.g., 100 percent of the FPL), or set other 
reasonable limits on the populations for whom the strategy is used.  
CMS recognizes that states may find other human services programs to be effective data sources 
for verifying income, and that gross income from SNAP or other human services programs may 
be effective for verifying income of non-MAGI applicants and beneficiaries. Indeed, some states 
were granted section 1902(e)(14)(A) authority to waive the requirement to make an income 
determination for non-MAGI individuals with SNAP gross income at or below the applicable 
non-MAGI income standard, and some were granted similar authority with respect to MAGI 
and/or non-MAGI individuals whose TANF gross income was at or below the applicable MAGI 
or non-MAGI income standard.   
 
11 U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service (FNS), “Characteristics of USDA’s Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Households: Fiscal Year 2022 (Summary),” June 2024, available at: 
https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/ops-snap-fy22characteristics-summary.pdf. 
12 Additional CMS guidance on verifying income using information from other data sources is forthcoming. 
13 Additional CMS guidance on verifying financial eligibility during an ex parte renewal is forthcoming. 



--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
CMS is not aware of any analyses that indicate how accurate verification using TANF’s or 
another program’s income determination will be in verifying an individual’s income for purposes 
of Medicaid eligibility (based on either MAGI or non-MAGI methodologies) or of any analyses 
that indicate how accurate verification using SNAP gross income would be in verifying income 
for purposes of Medicaid eligibility based on non-MAGI methodologies. Additionally, there may 
be significant state variation in other programs’ eligibility and income counting rules, which 
would require a state-specific analysis to determine the usefulness of the data source for 
Medicaid purposes. If a state is interested in using the gross income determination from a human 
services program other than SNAP or is interested in using SNAP gross income for non-MAGI 
populations, the state must conduct and share with CMS an analysis to demonstrate that the 
program’s gross income determination would be a useful data source for verifying income and 
identify such program’s gross income determination as a useful data source in its verification 
plan in accordance with 42 C.F.R. § 435.945(j).14    
2. Options to Complete Ex Parte Renewal When No Data Sources Return Income 
Information, Including the Zero-Dollar and 100 Percent FPL Income Strategies 
Regulations at 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.916(b)(1) and (b)(3) provide that states must renew eligibility 
without requiring information from beneficiaries if able to do so based on reliable information 
available to the state, and send a renewal form to the beneficiary to obtain needed information if 
unable to do so. CMS generally has interpreted these provisions to mean that, when information 
from a reliable data source regarding eligibility criteria that are subject to change is not available, 
states must send a renewal form and may not conclude that a household has income below the 
applicable income standard based on information verified 12 months prior.15  
To address challenges during unwinding, CMS authorized two related section 1902(e)(14)(A) 
waiver strategies, known as the “Zero-Dollar” and “100 Percent FPL” income strategies, that 
enabled states to complete an ex parte renewal when the state reviews all available income data 
sources, but no income data is returned. Under the Zero-Dollar and 100 Percent FPL income 
strategies, CMS waived the requirements in 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.916(b)(1) and (b)(3) to enable 
states to assume no change in income in conducting an ex parte renewal when the following 
conditions are met: (1) the individual’s income at the last full determination of eligibility was $0 
or at or under 100 percent of the FPL, respectively; (2) the state pings all income data sources 
used by the state in accordance with its verification plan; and (3) no information is returned from 
the data sources. The Zero-Dollar and 100 Percent FPL income strategies approved by CMS 
under section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver authority initially required that a beneficiary’s most recent 
income determination, verified in a manner other than use of these strategies, had been 
completed no earlier than 12 months prior to the beginning of the PHE. In the May 9, 2024, CIB, 
CMS subsequently permitted states to continue use of these strategies through June 30, 2025, 
without regard to whether the strategy had been previously used (so long as certain additional 
conditions were met to ensure the strategy was not used to renew coverage of individuals who 
were no longer a state resident).  
States adopting the Zero-Dollar and 100 Percent FPL income strategies reported that these 
waivers were highly effective in streamlining the income verification process during ex parte 
renewals. Further, data analyzed by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation (ASPE) in the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) reinforces that 
 
14 Note this is different than the option that is available for children under section 1902(e)(13) of the Act, which 
allows states to use income or other findings from one or more Express Lane Agencies designated by the state in 
determining Medicaid or CHIP eligibility for children at application and/or renewal. States are not required to 
provide CMS any analyses in order to adopt Express Lane Eligibility, which can be used for children seeking 
coverage on either a MAGI or non-MAGI basis. 
15 In discussing the ex parte renewal process in the preamble to a final rule published in 2012, CMS wrote: “[I]f 
information subject to change is missing…then a State must seek information from the individual before renewing 
eligibility.” CMS, final rule, “Medicaid Program; Eligibility Changes Under the Affordable Care Act of 2010,” 
March 3, 2012, available at: https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2012-6560/p-484. 



--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
these strategies effectively achieve states’ program integrity responsibilities.16 ASPE estimates 
that, nationally, about 16 percent of Medicaid beneficiaries would likely meet the criteria for the 
Zero-Dollar or 100 Percent FPL income strategy—that is, had income at or below 100 percent of 
FPL at their last determination and have no data sources return financial information when the 
state is conducting their renewal. For this population, according to ASPE’s analysis, employing 
the 100 Percent FPL income strategy and renewing financial eligibility without requiring 
additional information would result in an accurate determination of financial eligibility in 92 
percent of cases. When considering the use of this strategy within the broader context of all 
Medicaid renewals, ASPE estimates that employing the 100 Percent FPL income strategy would 
result in a potentially erroneous eligibility determination for 1.2 percent of all Medicaid 
beneficiaries at renewal. The analysis of the 100 Percent FPL income strategy is inclusive of the 
population that would meet the criteria for the Zero-Dollar income strategy. This evidence 
underscores that the income eligibility of the population of beneficiaries with household income 
below 100 percent of FPL, including those with no household income (i.e., zero-dollar income), 
may be considered highly unlikely to change from year-to-year if certain conditions are met. 
Regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1) provide that the reliable information states must use in 
attempting an ex parte renewal includes reliable information available in a beneficiary’s account.  
Thus, in conducting a renewal, states must use information from a beneficiary’s account (such as 
citizenship status and date of birth for determining age) that is not subject to change. As will be 
discussed in more detail in forthcoming CMS guidance, states also have flexibility to consider 
information in a beneficiary’s account reliable if the state has determined the information is 
highly unlikely to change or, in the case of income or assets, highly unlikely to increase (e.g., the 
value of a vehicle or certain types of life insurance policies).17  
State Plan Strategy & Implementation Considerations 
Based on ASPE’s analysis, CMS has determined that it would be reasonable for a state to 
determine that the previously-verified household income (for MAGI-based beneficiaries) or total 
countable income (for non-MAGI beneficiaries) in a beneficiary’s account is reliable in 
conducting an ex parte renewal if: (1) the individual had a previously-verified attestation of 
income at or below an income level (including zero-dollar income) elected by the state, not to 
exceed 100 percent of the FPL; (2) the state has checked all available income data sources in 
accordance with its verification plan and no information is received; and (3) the state follows its 
verification plan to confirm the beneficiary’s continued state residency.18   
States adopting this strategy may elect to apply it only to individuals whose previously-verified 
income was zero dollars or to individuals whose previously-verified income was at or below an 
income standard elected by the state up to 100 percent of the FPL (e.g., 75 percent of the FPL).  
States also may elect a different income standard for different eligibility groups (e.g., 100 percent 
of the FPL for individuals enrolled in the adult group described at 42 C.F.R. § 435.119, and 50 
percent of the FPL for individuals enrolled in the group for parents and caretaker relatives 
described at 42 C.F.R. § 435.110), provided that the state documents a reasonable basis for its 
belief that the different standards are necessary to ensure program integrity. 
States that adopt this strategy on a permanent basis also must establish and document the 
maximum amount of time that is permitted to elapse since the state last verified a beneficiary’s 
attested income without using this strategy (either at initial application or a renewal). CMS 
 
16 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, 
“Evaluating Medicaid Strategies to Streamline Ex Parte Renewals,” November 14, 2024, available at: 
https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/medicaid-ex-parte-renewals. 
17 For additional information about assets unlikely to change, see question 9 from CMS, “COVID-19 Public Health 
Emergency Unwinding Frequently Asked Questions for State Medicaid and CHIP Agencies,” October 17, 2022, 
available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/covid-19-unwinding-faqs-oct-2022.pdf. 
18 Effective December 3, 2025, consistent with 42 CFR § 435.919(f) and 457.344, states are required to regularly 
obtain updated address information from reliable data sources and update the beneficiary’s record with that 
information if the data source provides an updated in-state address. If a reliable data source provides an out-of-state 
address, the state must terminate the beneficiary's coverage if the beneficiary does not confirm they continue to meet 
the residency requirements. 



--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
considers a verified attestation of income that was made no earlier than three years prior to be 
reasonable, although states may establish a different reasonable maximum period of time.  
States electing this strategy must have the beneficiary information necessary to match with the 
income data sources used by the state (for example, Social Security Number). States are 
reminded that they must comply with the following regulatory requirements, which apply 
regardless of whether the state has adopted this strategy:  
• The state must review other eligibility requirements (such as assets for beneficiaries 
enrolled on a non-MAGI basis) before making a final determination of eligibility during 
the ex parte renewal process. 
• As part of the eligibility determination notice, states must notify individuals whose 
coverage is renewed using this strategy that they must inform the agency if any of the 
information relied upon by the state in completing the renewal is inaccurate (including an 
increase in income), consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1)(ii). 
3. Strategy to Streamline Use of Asset Verification System (AVS) 
For individuals subject to an asset test whose eligibility is being determined on the basis of being 
age 65 or older or having blindness or a disability, section 1940 of the Act requires that states 
implement and use an AVS for assets held by a financial institution. During the unwinding 
period, CMS approved an unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver that has allowed 
states to assume no change in assets verified through the AVS when no information is returned 
through the AVS or when the AVS call is not returned within a reasonable timeframe, and to 
complete the ex parte renewal process without any further verification of assets. This strategy 
helped to minimize procedural terminations by facilitating more ex parte renewals and limiting 
the instances in which states had to request documentation from beneficiaries.   
Compliance with 42 C.F.R. § 435.952(c), under which states may not request additional 
information or documentation from an individual if data to verify attested information is 
available to the state, and 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1), under which states must attempt to conduct 
an ex parte renewal based on available data and information in a beneficiary’s account, requires 
that states establish a reasonable timeframe to wait for information to be returned from its AVS 
before requesting documentation or other information to verify assets. Not all financial 
institutions participate in all states’ AVS, and the response times may vary between states, AVS 
vendors, and/or participating financial institution. In establishing a reasonable timeframe to wait 
for data to be returned through their AVS, states should consider the response times experienced 
in their AVS. States also set a general timeline in order to complete beneficiaries’ renewals 
timely, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(c). In setting this overall renewal timeline, states 
may consider initiating the AVS check ahead of other data sources that are checked during the ex 
parte process to account for the potential lengthy AVS response time. 
State Plan Strategy & Implementation Considerations  
Provided a state builds into its ex parte renewal process a reasonable period of time for financial 
institutions to respond to an AVS query,19 CMS has determined that the state may assume no 
change in the value of a previously-verified asset if the state submits a request through its AVS 
and no information is returned or there is no response from the AVS within the reasonable 
timeframe the state has established. Regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.916 afford states the 
flexibility to determine that certain assets are unlikely to appreciate in value and allow states to 
rely on the value of the asset in a beneficiary’s account at renewal. This strategy would enable 
the state to complete an ex parte renewal for some beneficiaries without requesting additional 
documentation for asset types that can be verified with AVS. Specifically, if an individual only 
has assets held in financial institutions, or their only other assets are not likely to appreciate in 
value, the state would be able to complete an ex parte renewal, without any further verification 
of assets.  
 
19 The amount of a time a state allots for financial institutions to respond to an AVS query in its ex parte renewal 
process can be different than the timeframe allotted at application.  



--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
As part of the eligibility determination notice, a state electing this strategy must notify 
individuals whose coverage is renewed using this strategy that they must inform the agency if 
any of the information relied upon by the state in completing the renewal is inaccurate, consistent 
with 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1)(ii). If the state receives asset information from AVS that indicates 
the individual’s total assets may have increased after a beneficiary has been renewed on an ex 
parte basis, the information from AVS must be processed as a change in circumstance, in 
accordance with 42 C.F.R. § 435.919(b).20 
B. 
Discontinued Blanket Authority for Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver 
Strategies  
As the unprecedented conditions created by the COVID-19 PHE and unwinding that necessitated 
the unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies are abating, the broad availability 
of a number of these strategies will end on June 30, 2025, consistent with the May 9, 2024, CIB. 
These strategies are described in the appendix. While existing statutory or regulatory 
requirements do not allow states to continue these strategies as approved under section 
1902(e)(14)(A) waiver authority, where applicable, CMS has described potential alternative 
approaches to some of these strategies in the appendix. CMS advises states to prepare to end use 
of these sunsetting strategies, or to implement the alternative described in the appendix, by that 
date. States that would like to sunset any unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers prior 
to June 30, 2025, should notify CMS.  
CMS recognizes that states are in various stages of resuming routine eligibility and enrollment 
operations. As many states work toward full compliance with federal requirements related to 
eligibility renewals, CMS expects states to continue or initiate mitigation strategies to minimize 
the impact of any non-compliance with requirements on Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries. States 
are instructed to seek approval for waivers, as appropriate, under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the 
Act as part of the renewal compliance template.21 To use any of the strategies for which the 
blanket approval is sunsetting and that are not permissible under current regulations, a state must 
request and receive CMS approval of, new authority under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act. 
Generally, states may also seek CMS approval for waivers under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the 
Act for strategies beyond those captured in the appendix. Such requests, whether needed in the 
context of renewal compliance or for another purpose, will be considered individually and 
approved on a time-limited basis, if needed to address compliance and/or systems issues that 
prevent the state from establishing income and eligibility determination systems that protect 
beneficiaries. CMS is committed to working with states to ensure that state systems and 
operations meet the goals of the Medicaid and CHIP programs and support program integrity.  
III. 
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations: State Options to Delay Procedural 
Disenrollments 
The exception to timely determinations of eligibility at 42 C.F.R. § 435.912(e) permits states to 
exceed the timeliness standard established in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of that 
section when there is an administrative or other emergency beyond the agency’s control. In the 
May 9, 2024, CIB,22 CMS announced that the unprecedented volume of renewals during 
unwinding warranted the continued use of this exception for renewals initiated through June 30, 
2025, and that states may continue to rely on the timeliness exception to delay a procedural 
disenrollment for up to three months while the state conducts targeted outreach to encourage the 
 
20 Note that, in the case of a child who is excepted from MAGI-based methodologies and subject to an asset test, 
AVS information returned after the child’s coverage is renewed cannot result in disenrollment due to the requirement 
to provide continuous eligibility under section 1902(e)(16) of the Act. See slide 2, CMS, “Scenarios: The 
Intersection of Continuous Eligibility and Individual Level of Renewal Processes,” October 2023, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/downloads/int-contin-elig-indiv-lvl-renew-process.pdf. 
21 CMS, CIB, “State Compliance with Medicaid and CHIP Renewal Requirements by December 31, 2026” 
September 20, 2024, available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib09202024.pdf.  
22 CMS, CIB, “Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities,” May 9, 2024, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf. 



--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
beneficiary to return their renewal form, if the state continues to meet the conditions set forth in 
the regulations.  
As states return to regular operations, CMS’s broad concurrence with application of this option 
will not continue after June 30, 2025, as states are expected to have made significant progress in 
their efforts to resume routine operations (e.g., reduction in backlog of pending renewals, 
completion of work towards system compliance with federal renewal regulations). However, to 
achieve a similar result, states can build additional time into their renewal processes by adjusting 
the timing of renewal notifications to provide beneficiaries additional time to return their renewal 
form and by conducting targeted outreach to beneficiaries at risk of losing coverage for 
procedural reasons. If a state experiences an administrative or other emergency (e.g., natural 
disaster affecting all or parts of the state, such as a hurricane, flood, or wildfire) beyond the 
agency’s control and the state believes the circumstances meet the conditions to apply the 
exception at 42 C.F.R. § 435.912(e) such that the state would be justified in delaying procedural 
terminations in order to conduct targeted outreach, CMS strongly recommends that the state seek 
CMS concurrence to use the exception.  
IV. 
Eligibility System Changes 
A state may need to make changes to its eligibility and enrollment system to ensure compliance 
with the requirements described in this CIB. State Medicaid agency IT system costs may be 
eligible for enhanced federal financial participation (FFP). Approval for enhanced match requires 
the submission of an Advanced Planning Document (APD). A state may submit an APD 
requesting approval for a 90/10 enhanced match for the design, development, and 
implementation of their Medicaid Enterprise Systems (MES) initiatives that contribute to the 
economic and efficient operation of the program and ensure compliance with the requirements 
reiterated in this CIB, including the maintenance and operations of these services. Interested 
states should refer to 45 C.F.R. Part 95 Subpart F—Automatic Data Processing Equipment and 
Services—Conditions for FFP for the specifics related to APD submission. States may also 
request a 75/25 enhanced match for ongoing operations of CMS approved systems. Interested 
states should refer to 42 C.F.R. Part 433 Subpart C—Mechanized Claims Processing and 
Information Retrieval Systems for the specifics related to systems approval. 
V. 
Closing 
CMS advises that states carefully review the appendix for additional details regarding the 
unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies that may be continued at state option 
and the necessary steps to do so, and those that are newly required by the April 2024 Eligibility 
and Enrollment final rule, and that must discontinue on June 30, 2025, absent new authority 
granted by CMS. To implement any of the strategies discussed in this CIB, states must document 
their use of such strategies in their verification policies and procedures. At this time, CMS is not 
requiring states to submit updated verification plans with any new policies based on the 
flexibilities described in this guidance. However, CMS may require specific policies detailed in 
this guidance be included in verification plans submitted to CMS in the future. CMS approval of 
state verification plans is not required, but states must submit their plans to CMS upon request, 
consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.945(j). 
For additional information about this CIB, please contact Suzette Seng, Director, Division of 
Enrollment Policy and Operations, at Suzette.Seng@cms.hhs.gov. States may also submit 
questions and request technical assistance by contacting their Medicaid state lead. 



--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
Appendix: Continued Availability of Certain Strategies Based on Unwinding-Related Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers Beyond June 30, 2025 
To support states’ efforts to protect continuity of coverage during their unwinding periods, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) approved the use of certain 
temporary authorities, including waivers under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Social Security Act (the Act).23 Section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act permits CMS to approve time-
limited waivers “as are necessary to ensure that states establish income and eligibility determination systems that protect beneficiaries.” CMS approved section 1902(e)(14)(A) 
waivers in relation to unwinding-related challenges that states faced; this included waivers to: increase ex parte renewal rates, support beneficiaries with renewal form submission 
or completion, obtain updated beneficiary contact information, promote continuity of coverage and care, and facilitate reinstatement of eligible individuals disenrolled for 
procedural reasons. In the May 9, 2024, Center for Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) Services (CMCS) Informational Bulletin (CIB), CMS announced 
that all unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers would be extended through June 30, 2025.24 Since publishing the May 9, 2024 CIB, CMS has reviewed the potential for 
making available permanently each of the strategies facilitated by unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers.  
The table below outlines which unwinding-related section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies (1) may continue long-term in a materially similar way to the unwinding-related 
strategies currently in place at states’ option under their Medicaid or CHIP state plan, (2) are required25 under recent changes to Medicaid and CHIP regulations, or (3) will sunset 
after June 30, 2025. Through our work with states and feedback from other stakeholders, CMS has recognized the effectiveness of these strategies in streamlining eligibility and 
enrollment processes to reduce inappropriate terminations and mitigate the burden on state systems, eligibility staff, and beneficiaries. For each unwinding-related section 
1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategy listed, CMS provides a rationale for continued availability or discontinuation of the strategy. CMS advises that states carefully review the chart for 
the steps that states may need to take to continue use of a strategy, if applicable. For strategies that will be discontinued, as well as for some unique unwinding-related section 
1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies that were approved in individual states and are therefore not captured in the chart below, states may request approval from CMS to continue use 
after June 30, 2025, on an individual basis. At this time, CMS does not require states to submit updated verification plans including any of the continuing strategies discussed in 
this chart. However, CMS may require states to submit updated verification plans—including to identify any strategies discussed in this CIB that the state has adopted —in the 
future. CMS approval of state verification plans is not required, but states must submit their plans to CMS upon request, consistent with 42 C.F.R. §435.945(j).  
 
23 CMS, “COVID-19 PHE Unwinding Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Approvals,” July 12, 2024, available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/unwinding-and-
returning-regular-operations-after-covid-19/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-approvals/index.html. See the full section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver dataset at: https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-
states/downloads/covid19-phe-unwinding-full-table-waiver-chart.xlsx.  
24 CMS, CIB, “Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities,” May 9, 2024, available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf.   
25 CMS, Final Rule, “Medicaid Program; Streamlining the Medicaid, Children's Health Insurance Program, and Basic Health Program Application, Eligibility Determination, Enrollment, and Renewal Processes,” 
April 2, 2024, available at: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/04/02/2024-06566/medicaid-program-streamlining-the-medicaid-childrens-health-insurance-program-and-basic-health. The April 2024 
Eligibility and Enrollment final rule codified several strategies in the regulations (89 FR 22780).  



--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
States may submit questions and request technical assistance by contacting Suzette Seng, Director, Division of Enrollment Policy and Operations, at Suzette.Seng@cms.hhs.gov or 
by contacting their Medicaid state lead.  
Table 1: Availability of Unwinding-Related Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers Beyond June 30, 2025 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
Strategies to Increase Ex Parte Renewal Rates  
1 
Applying for Other 
Benefits Strategy  
Suspend the requirement 
to apply for other benefits 
under 42 C.F.R. § 
435.608.  
Strategy required by the 
April 2024 Eligibility and 
Enrollment Final Rule. 
Under the April 2024 Eligibility and Enrollment Final Rule, the requirement to apply for other 
benefits as a condition of Medicaid eligibility (42 C.F.R. § 435.608) has been eliminated for all 
applicants and beneficiaries, effective June 3, 2024. All states must eliminate any requirement to 
apply for other benefits as a condition of Medicaid eligibility by no later than June 3, 2025, and may 
do so sooner. 
2 
Supplemental 
Nutrition 
Assistance 
Program 
(SNAP)/Temporary 
Assistance for 
Needy Families 
(TANF) Strategy  
Enroll and/or renew 
Medicaid eligibility for 
Modified Adjusted Gross 
Income (MAGI) or non-
MAGI-based individuals 
based on gross income 
findings from SNAP or 
TANF. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan to use SNAP 
gross income* (see note in 
last column) for MAGI 
populations.  
Section 1137 of the Act and implementing regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.948 identify SNAP as one of 
the data sources states are required to access to the extent the state determines SNAP to be useful for 
verifying income. In determining usefulness, CMS expects states to consider such factors as the 
accuracy of the financial information, the timeliness of the information returned, the complexity of 
accessing the data or data source, the age of the financial records, the comprehensiveness of the data, 
any limitations imposed by the owner of the data on its use, as well as other relevant factors. 
Consistent with the aforementioned factors for consideration, CMS expects states to exercise 
reasonable judgement in determining what data from the data source is useful for verifying income.  
To implement this strategy at application, renewal, or both, states must document their use of SNAP 
gross income in their verification policies and procedures. At this time, CMS is not requiring states to 
submit updated verification plans with any new policies based on the flexibilities described in this 
guidance.** CMS may require specific policies detailed in this guidance be included in verification 
plans in the future. CMS approval of state verification plans is not required, but states must submit 
their plans to CMS upon request, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.945(j). 
*Note: If a state is interested in using the gross income determination from a human service program 
other than SNAP, such as TANF, or is interested in using SNAP gross income for non-MAGI 
populations, the state must conduct and share with CMS an analysis to determine whether that 
program’s gross income determination would be a useful data source for verifying income.  
**CMS is requiring states to submit their updated MAGI-based verification plans to CMS if a state 
implementing this policy does not already include SNAP as a useful data source for verifying 
financial information. 



--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
3 
$0 Income Strategy  
Renew Medicaid 
eligibility for individuals 
with no income and no 
data returned on an ex 
parte basis. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
For individuals with a previously-verified attestation of zero-dollar income, if the state has checked all 
available income data sources in accordance with its verification plan and no information is received, 
the state may consider the previously-verified income determination in the beneficiary’s account as 
reliable under 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1) in conducting an ex parte renewal without requesting 
additional information or documentation of income. To implement this strategy, a state would need to 
comply with regulatory requirements and guardrails detailed in this CIB.  
States that adopt this strategy on a permanent basis must establish the maximum amount of time that 
has elapsed since the state last verified zero-dollar income without using this strategy (either at initial 
application or a renewal). 
To implement this strategy, states must document its use in their verification policies and procedures. 
At this time, CMS is not requiring states to submit updated verification plans with any new policies 
based on the flexibilities described in this guidance. CMS may require specific policies detailed in this 
guidance be included in verification plans in the future. CMS approval of state verification plans is not 
required, but states must submit their plans to CMS upon request, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 
435.945(j). 
4 
100 Percent 
Income Strategy 
Renew Medicaid 
eligibility for individuals 
with income at or below 
100 percent of the federal 
poverty level (FPL) and 
no data returned on an ex 
parte basis. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
For individuals with previously-verified income at or below 100 percent of the FPL, if the state has 
checked all available income data sources in accordance with its verification plan and no information 
is received, the state may consider the previously-verified income determination in the beneficiary’s 
account as reliable under 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(a) in conducting an ex parte renewal without requesting 
additional information or documentation of income. To implement this strategy, a state would need to 
comply with regulatory requirements and guardrails detailed in this CIB.  
States that adopt this strategy on a permanent basis must establish the maximum amount of time that 
has elapsed since the state last verified income at or below 100 percent of FPL without using this 
strategy (either at initial application or a renewal). 
States may choose a lower FPL at which to implement the 100 percent FPL strategy. 
To implement this strategy, states must document its use in their verification policies and procedures. 
At this time, CMS is not requiring states to submit updated verification plans with any new policies 
based on the flexibilities described in this guidance. CMS may require specific policies detailed in this 
guidance be included in verification plans in the future. CMS approval of state verification plans is not 
required, but states must submit their plans to CMS upon request, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 
435.945(j). 



--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
5 
Streamlining Asset 
Determinations 
Strategy 
Renew Medicaid 
eligibility without regard 
to the resource test for 
non-MAGI beneficiaries 
who are subject to a 
resource test. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
Pursuant to the longstanding authority in section 1902(r)(2) of the Act, states may disregard (i.e., not 
count) otherwise countable income and/or resources in making non-MAGI eligibility determinations. 
For example, a number of states disregard all assets for the Medicare Savings Program groups 
described in Section 1902(a)(10)(E)(i), (iii), and (iv) of the Act. Similarly, states may disregard 
increases in assets beneficiaries experience after their date of application.  
To implement this strategy, a state would need to submit an eligibility state plan amendment to apply 
a 1902(r)(2) disregard and specify the non-MAGI eligibility groups to which the disregard would 
apply.  
6 
Asset Verification 
System (AVS) 
Strategy  
Renew Medicaid for 
individuals for whom 
information from the 
AVS is not returned or is 
not returned within a 
reasonable timeframe. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
Provided a state builds into its ex parte renewal process a reasonable period of time for financial 
institutions to respond to an AVS query, CMS has determined that the state may assume no change in 
the value of a previously-verified asset if the state submits a request through its AVS and no 
information is returned or there is no response from the AVS within the reasonable timeframe the state 
has established. Regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.916 afford states the flexibility to determine that 
certain assets are unlikely to appreciate in value and allow states to rely on the value of the asset in a 
beneficiary’s account at renewal. This strategy would enable the state to complete an ex parte renewal 
for some beneficiaries without requesting additional documentation for asset types that can be verified 
with AVS. Specifically, if an individual only has assets held in financial institutions, or their only 
other assets are not likely to appreciate in value, the state would be able to complete an ex parte 
renewal, without any further verification of assets. 
To implement this strategy, states should document its use in their verification policies and 
procedures. At this time, CMS is not requiring states to submit updated verification plans with any 
new policies based on the flexibilities described in this guidance CMS may require specific 
policies detailed in this guidance be included in verification plans in the future. CMS approval of state 
verification plans is not required, but states must submit their plans to CMS upon request, consistent 
with 42 C.F.R. § 435.945(j). 



--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
7 
Stable Income and 
Asset Strategy 
Renew Medicaid 
eligibility for individuals 
with only Title II or other 
stable sources of income 
(e.g., pension income) or 
stable assets (e.g., burial 
funds) without checking 
required data sources. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
States have flexibility to make a reasonable determination of what types of income and assets are 
highly likely to remain stable (or decrease in value) in conducting an ex parte renewal under 42 C.F.R. 
§ 435.916(b)(1). Stable sources of income may include income from a fixed pension, as this generally 
does not change year to year. Fixed distributions of dividends or interest and non-retirement fixed 
annuities are also likely to remain stable. Assets that are highly unlikely to increase in value, and may 
even decrease, include the value of a second vehicle (if considered in determining countable assets), 
burial funds, special needs trusts (provided that the state clearly advises beneficiaries on their 
responsibility to report any changes to the terms of the trust), and some life insurance policies. 
Therefore, states may, when attempting an ex parte renewal per 42 C.F.R. § 435.916(b)(1), assume no 
change in those income sources or assets determined by the state to be stable without checking data 
sources. In these instances, states use the stable income or asset in the beneficiary case file as verified 
information when determining financial eligibility.  
To implement this strategy states should document its use in their verification policies and procedures. 
At this time, CMS is not requiring states to submit updated verification plans with any new policies 
based on the flexibilities described in this guidance. CMS may require specific policies detailed in this 
guidance be included in verification plans in the future. CMS approval of state verification plans is not 
required, but states must submit their plans to CMS upon request, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 
435.945(j).  



--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
8 
Medical Support 
Cooperation 
Strategy  
Suspend the requirement 
to cooperate with the 
agency in establishing the 
identity of a child's 
parents and in obtaining 
medical support. 
 
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
Under sections 1912 and 1902(a)(45) of the Act and 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.610, 433.145, 433.147, and 
433.148, beneficiaries are required either to cooperate with the state in obtaining, from liable third 
parties, medical support and payments for themselves or for a person for whom the individual can 
legally assign rights, or to establish good cause for not doing so. Individuals who assign the rights to 
medical support and payments on behalf of a child must also cooperate with the state in establishing 
the identity of the child’s non-custodial parent(s) or establish good cause for not doing so. Individuals 
(unless exempt per regulations at 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.610, such as pregnant individuals) must agree to 
cooperate in establishing paternity and obtaining medical support at application. At application, 
individuals must indicate that they are willing to fulfill these cooperation requirements unless they are 
exempt, but states cannot require such individuals to take concrete steps to meet medical support 
cooperation requirements until after enrollment. 
CMS encourages states to evaluate their policies and practices to identify opportunities to streamline 
medical support cooperation enforcement and ensure eligible individuals enroll in and retain Medicaid 
coverage. For more information see CMS, “Medicaid Medical Support Requirements and 
Implementation Strategies,” June 2023.26 
Strategies to Support Beneficiaries with Renewal Form Submission or Completion 
9 
Managed Care 
Organization 
(MCO) Renewal 
Support Strategy 
Permit MCOs to provide 
assistance to beneficiaries 
to complete and submit 
Medicaid renewal forms. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
Existing managed care regulations do not prohibit MCOs from conducting outreach and assisting 
beneficiaries with completing and submitting renewal forms, provided that the plan does not provide 
choice counseling (defined at 42 C.F.R. § 438.2). MCOs may not complete any renewal form fields 
related to plan choice and may not sign the renewal form on behalf of the beneficiary.  
To implement this strategy, a state would need to document their choice to do so in their state policy 
manual and make the manual available to CMS upon request. 
10 
Telephonic 
Signature 
Recording Strategy 
Waive the recording of 
the telephone signature at 
application and/or 
renewal from the 
applicant or beneficiary. 
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
Per 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.907(f) and 435.916(b)(2)(ii)(B), all initial applications and renewal forms must 
be signed under penalty of perjury. Signatures transmitted telephonically must be recorded. When 
recording a telephonic signature, states have flexibility to record the entire application or renewal 
conversation, including the signature under penalty of perjury, or to record only the signature under 
penalty of perjury.  
 
26 CMS, “Medicaid Medical Support Requirements and Implementation Strategies,” June 2023, available at: https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/eligibility/downloads/mm-supp-req-impl-strategies.pdf.  



--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
11 
Authorized 
Representative 
Designation 
Strategy 
Permit the designation of 
an authorized 
representative for the 
purposes of signing an 
application or renewal 
form via the telephone 
without a signed 
designation from the 
applicant or beneficiary. 
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
42 C.F.R. § 435.923 requires that applicants and beneficiaries be able to designate an authorized 
representative to act on their behalf and that the signature of the applicant or beneficiary be included 
with the designation. Signatures must be accepted in all modalities available at 42 C.F.R. § 
435.907(f), including by telephone.  
Strategies to Obtain Updated Beneficiary Contact Information 
12 
National Change of 
Address (NCOA) 
and/or U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS) 
Contact Update 
Strategy 
Update the beneficiary’s 
case record with the 
updated in-state contact 
information received 
from the NCOA database 
or USPS returned mail 
without first sending a 
notice to the beneficiary 
address on file with the 
state.  
Strategy required by the 
April 2024 Eligibility and 
Enrollment Final Rule. 
Under 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.919(f)(1) and 457.344, states must establish a process to obtain updated 
address information from reliable sources, including the NCOA, mail returned by USPS with a 
forwarding address, and MCOs. If the state receives an updated in-state address from a reliable source, 
it must accept the information, update the beneficiary's case record with the updated address, and 
notify the beneficiary of the change in accordance with 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.919(f)(2) and 457.344. 
States may not require verification of an address change from the beneficiary prior to updating their 
record. This requirement was finalized by the April 2024 Eligibility and Enrollment final rule. All 
states must comply with this requirement by December 3, 2025, and may implement it sooner. 
13 
Managed Care 
Organization 
(MCO) Beneficiary 
Contact Update 
Strategy 
Update the beneficiary’s 
case record with the 
updated in-state contact 
information received 
from an MCO without 
first sending a notice to 
the beneficiary address 
on file with the state.  
Strategy required by the 
April 2024 Eligibility and 
Enrollment final rule. 
See description above for NCOA and/or USPS Contact Update Strategy. 



--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
14 
Enrollment Broker 
and/or Program of 
All-Inclusive Care 
for the Elderly 
(PACE) Contact 
Update Strategy  
Update the beneficiary’s 
case record with the 
updated in-state contact 
information received 
from enrollment brokers 
and/or PACE 
organizations without 
first sending a notice to 
the beneficiary address 
on file with the state.  
Optional strategy under 
April 2024 Eligibility and 
Enrollment final rule. 
42 C.F.R. §§ 435.919(f)(1)(iii)(D) and 457.344 provide states with flexibility to deem other sources 
identified by the agency and approved by the Secretary as reliable for purposes of obtaining updated 
contact information. States may opt to deem enrollment brokers and/or PACE organizations to be 
reliable sources. If this option is elected, the state must, upon receipt of an updated in-state address 
from an enrollment broker and/or PACE organization, accept the information, update the beneficiary’s 
case record with the updated address, and notify the beneficiary of the change in accordance with 42 
C.F.R. §§ 435.919(f)(2) and 457.344.  
To implement this option, states should clearly document use of this strategy in internal files, for audit 
and other purposes. States may be asked to provide these documents to CMS upon request.   
Strategies to Promote Continuity of Coverage and Care   
15 
12-Month 
Extension for 
Children and/or 
Non-MAGI 
Beneficiaries 
Strategy  
Renew Medicaid 
eligibility for children 
and/or non-MAGI 
beneficiaries for 12 
months based on the 
individual’s most recent 
Medicaid determination 
(either at initial 
application or most recent 
renewal) without 
conducting a renewal or 
making a new eligibility 
determination.  
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
Regulations at 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.916 and 457.343 require states to conduct renewals and make a new 
eligibility determination for most individuals enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP once every 12 months.  
States currently must conduct MAGI-based renewals once every 12 months.  The requirement for 
states to conduct non-MAGI based renewals once every 12 months (instead of at least once every 12 
months) was finalized by the April 2024 Eligibility and Enrollment final rule. All states must comply 
with this requirement for non-MAGI based renewals by June 3, 2027, and may implement it sooner.  
16 
Medicaid Premium 
Resumption Delay 
Strategy 
Delay the resumption of 
Medicaid premiums 
otherwise approved under 
the state plan for a 
beneficiary until the 
individual’s 
redetermination is 
completed.  
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
States may not generally suspend premiums for some individuals in a population subject to a premium 
and not others. States may request to eliminate premiums for all individuals in a given population(s) 
currently subject to a premium by submitting a state plan amendment. 



--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
17 
Former Foster Care 
Children (FFCC) 
Strategy 
Extend eligibility in the 
FFCC group to youth 
formerly in foster care 
from any state, without 
regard to when the 
individual turned age 18. 
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
Under section 1002(a) of the Substance Use Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and 
Treatment for Patients and Communities (SUPPORT) Act (Pub. L. 115-271), states must apply 
different eligibility rules in determining eligibility for the FFCC group under section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX) of the Act based on when an individual reaches age 18.  
As discussed in State Health Official Letter #22-00327, states may request to establish a section 1115 
demonstration to cover youth formerly in foster care from other states regardless of when an 
individual reaches age 18.    
18 
Fair Hearings 
Timeframe 
Extension Strategy  
Extend the timeframe 
permitted for the state to 
take final administrative 
action on fair hearing 
requests, greater than the 
90-day time limit, 
provided that state 
provides benefits pending 
the outcome of the fair 
hearing to all appellants.  
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
States must take final administrative action on all fair hearing requests within 90 days from the date 
the individual filed the fair hearing request in accordance with 42 C.F.R. § 431.244(f)(1), unless the 
agency cannot reach a decision because the appellant requests a delay or fails to take a required action, 
or an administrative or other emergency beyond the agency’s control prevents it from doing so (42 
C.F.R. § 431.244(f)(4)(i)(A) and (B)).    
 
27 CMS. (December 16,2022). State Health Official Letter #22-003 RE: Coverage of Youth Formerly in Foster Care in Medicaid (Section 1022(a)of the SUPPORT Act). Available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/sho22003.pdf 



--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 21 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
Strategies to Facilitate Reinstatement of Eligible Individuals Disenrolled for Procedural Reasons 
19 
State Agency 
and/or Other 
Qualified Entities 
Using Presumptive 
Eligibility (PE) 
Strategy 
Designate state agency, 
pharmacies, community-
based organizations 
(CBOs), and/or other 
providers as qualified 
entities to make 
determinations of PE on a 
MAGI basis for 
individuals not enrolled 
in Medicaid or CHIP. 
Designate the state 
agency as a qualified 
entity to make PE 
determinations on a 
MAGI basis and allow 
the option to make PE 
determinations based on 
information provided on 
a renewal form or a full 
Medicaid application, and 
extend the PE period 
until the state determines 
eligibility based on the 
renewal form or a full 
Medicaid application. 
Optional strategy under 
state plan. 
Under federal regulations at 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.1103 and 457.355, states may permit qualified entities, 
including the state agency itself, pharmacies, CBOs, and/or other providers, to make PE 
determinations on a MAGI-basis for individuals not enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP. Once determined 
eligible for PE, the PE period begins on the day that the qualified entity approves PE. If a full 
Medicaid/CHIP application is submitted by the last day of the month after the month that PE is 
determined, the PE period ends on the date full Medicaid eligibility is approved or denied. If a full 
Medicaid and/or CHIP application is not submitted by the last day of the month after the month that 
PE is determined, the PE period ends on that day.  States may require qualified entities to assist 
individuals with a PE determination in completing a Medicaid/CHIP application.  
Consistent with requirements at 42 C.F.R. §§ 435.916(b)(2)(iii) and 457.343, this strategy allows state 
agencies to treat a renewal form returned during the reconsideration period for individuals with a PE 
determination as a Medicaid/CHIP application for the purposes of extending the PE period until the 
state determines eligibility. States electing this option would provide adequate training to qualified 
entities making PE determinations to assist individuals with completing a Medicaid application or 
renewal form for individuals whose coverage had been terminated for failure to timely submit the 
renewal form. If a state designates itself as a qualified entity to make PE determinations, the state 
agency would treat a Medicaid application or renewal as a PE application and use the information on 
the application or renewal form to make a PE determination.   
To implement this strategy, states would submit a PE state plan amendment to adopt PE (if not already 
adopted in the state plan), and elect the option to treat renewal forms returned during the 
reconsideration period as a Medicaid/CHIP application for purposes of extending the PE period. States 
electing this option must also allow full Medicaid applications to extend the PE period for individuals 
with a PE determination. The state would list the qualified entities it is designating to make PE 
determinations and the MAGI populations it is electing to cover through PE in accordance with 42 
C.F.R. § 435.1103.  



--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 22 – CMCS Informational Bulletin 
# 
1902(e)(14)(A) 
Strategy 
Original Strategy 
Description 
Continued Availability of 
Strategy 
Rationale and Authority for Continued Availability or Discontinuation of Strategy 
20 
Reinstate 
Eligibility Back to 
Termination Date 
During 
Reconsideration 
Period Strategy 
Reinstate eligibility 
effective on the 
individual’s prior 
termination date for 
individuals who were 
disenrolled based on a 
procedural reason and are 
subsequently 
redetermined eligible for 
Medicaid during a 90-day 
reconsideration period. 
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
Medicaid and CHIP regulations do not otherwise support reinstatement of an individual’s eligibility 
back to the date of termination prior to a determination of eligibility based solely on the returned 
renewal form. However, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.915, states must provide up to three months 
of retroactive eligibility for individuals disenrolled for procedural reasons who are subsequently 
determined eligible for Medicaid during the reconsideration period, if the individual received 
Medicaid services in the three months prior to returning the renewal form and met Medicaid eligibility 
requirements when services were received. This enables a state to close or minimize potential 
coverage gaps.  
21 
Managed Care Plan 
Auto-Reenrollment 
Strategy 
Extend automatic 
reenrollment into an 
MCO to up to 120 days 
after a loss of Medicaid 
coverage.  
Blanket authority 
discontinued after June 30, 
2025. 
There is no regulatory authority to extend the automatic reenrollment period. Under section 
1903(m)(2)(H)(ii) of the Act and 42 C.F.R. § 438.56(g), states may require that Medicaid managed 
care contracts provide for automatic reenrollment into a beneficiary’s original plan for individuals 
who are reenrolled into Medicaid after a loss of Medicaid coverage for two months or less. 
 



--- PAGE 23 ---
Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term 
Improvements to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes 
November 2024
This communication was printed, published, or produced and disseminated at U.S. taxpayer expense. The information provided in this document is intended only to be a 
general informal summary of technical legal standards. It is not intended to take the place of the statutes, regulations, or formal policy guidance that it is based upon. This 
document summarizes current policy and operations as of the date it was presented. We encourage readers to refer to the applicable statutes, regulations, and other 
interpretive materials for complete and current information.
1



--- PAGE 24 ---
Objectives
This deck summarizes the CMCS Informational Bulletin (CIB), Use of 
Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to State 
Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes, and is part of a series of 
resources for states as they work to comply with federal requirements.
This slide deck is intended to provide states with guidance regarding the 
continued use of certain streamlined eligibility and enrollment strategies 
that were available to address challenges during the COVID-19 Public 
Health Emergency (PHE) and the return to regular operations following 
the end of the Medicaid continuous enrollment condition described in 
section 6008(b)(3) of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, the 
process commonly referred to as “unwinding.” 
Source: CMS CIB, Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment 
Processes.
2



--- PAGE 25 ---
Content Overview
Context Setting
― Use of Strategies Authorized by Section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act During Unwinding
― Approved Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers
Continued Availability of Unwinding-Related Waiver Strategies Beyond June 30, 2025
― Future Use of Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
― Strategies Codified in Final Eligibility and Enrollment Rule
― Strategies Available Under State Plan Authority 
― Strategies Related to Verifying Income and Resources
Discontinued Blanket Authority for Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations to Delay Procedural Disenrollments
State Resources
3



--- PAGE 26 ---
Context Setting
4



--- PAGE 27 ---
Use of Strategies Authorized by Section 1902(e)(14)(A) of 
the Act During Unwinding
To support states facing operational and systems issues and to protect eligible 
beneficiaries from inappropriate coverage losses during the unwinding period, the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) provided states with the option to 
request authority under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Social Security Act (the Act).
As outlined in the March 3, 2022, State Health Official (SHO) letter, CMS granted approval 
for states to use time-limited authority to streamline eligibility and enrollment processes, 
protect eligible individuals from becoming disenrolled, facilitate the renewal process, 
reduce the number of procedural terminations, and ease the state administrative burden 
during the unwinding. 
On May 9, 2024, CMS extended the use of these waivers through June 30, 2025, provided 
that the terms and conditions of the original waiver continue to be met.
Sources: CMS CIB, Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment 
Processes; CMS SHO, Promoting Continuity of Coverage and Distributing Eligibility and Enrollment Workload in Medicaid, the Children’s 
Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Upon Conclusion of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency; CMS CIB, 
Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities.
5



--- PAGE 28 ---
Approved Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waivers
Since April 2022, CMS has granted over 400 unwinding-related waivers to 52 states and 
territories that enabled them to streamline different parts of their renewal processes in 
support of their unwinding efforts.
A combined fifty states and territories received waiver approval to adopt strategies to 
increase ex parte rates, thereby minimizing administrative burdens for states and 
beneficiaries while supporting eligible individuals’ ability to renew their coverage. 
Thirty states received approval for waivers designed to better support enrollees with 
renewal completion and submission. 
Forty-five states received approval for strategies that facilitated their ability to update 
beneficiary contact information with information from trusted sources, minimizing 
coverage losses due to states’ inability to reach people.
Twenty states used waivers to ensure the reinstatement of eligible individuals who had 
been disenrolled for procedural reasons.
Note: For additional information on the section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers CMS has approved for states and territories to support the unwinding 
period, see https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/unwinding-and-returning-regular-operations-
after-covid-19/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-approvals/index.html. 
6



--- PAGE 29 ---
Continued Availability of Unwinding-Related 
Waiver Strategies Beyond June 30, 2025
7



--- PAGE 30 ---
Future Use of Unwinding-Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver 
Strategies  
To continue supporting states’ ability to strengthen and streamline renewal, CMS reviewed all 
section 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver strategies to determine which can be implemented on a long-
term basis.
o CMS received input from states, beneficiaries, and other stakeholders that these 
strategies meaningfully improved efforts to renew eligible people’s coverage. 
o CMS reviewed strategies made available during unwinding to determine whether states 
could continue using these strategies under existing federal statutory or regulatory 
authorities to strengthen and streamline renewal systems on a long-term basis.
CMS determined that states have the option or will be required by recent rulemaking to 
implement over half of the strategies under their state plan in accordance with statutory 
and regulatory authorities.
The remaining unwinding-related strategies cannot continue absent extenuating 
circumstances necessitating their use. As such unwinding-related circumstances are 
abating, existing statutory and regulatory requirements do not allow states to continue 
these strategies without justification and approval under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the 
Act.
8



--- PAGE 31 ---
Strategies Codified in Final Eligibility and Enrollment Rule
Several strategies were codified in regulations by the final eligibility and enrollment rule 
published on April 2, 2024.1 
Applying for Other Benefits Strategy – The requirement to apply for other benefits as a condition of 
Medicaid eligibility has been eliminated for all applicants and beneficiaries. All states must eliminate any 
requirement to apply for other benefits as a condition of Medicaid eligibility by no later than June 3, 
2025, and may do so sooner.
Strategies to Obtain Updated Beneficiary Contact Information – States must establish a process to 
obtain updated address information from reliable sources.
— States must use the National Change of Address (NCOA) database, mail returned by the U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS) with a forwarding address, and managed care organizations (MCOs) to update 
beneficiary contact information. If the state receives an updated in-state address from a reliable 
source, it must accept the information, update the beneficiary's case record with the updated 
address, and notify the beneficiary of the change. All states must comply with this requirement by 
December 3, 2025, and may do so sooner.
— Additionally, the final rule provides states with flexibility to deem other sources identified by the 
agency and approved by the Secretary as reliable for purposes of obtaining updated contact 
information. States may opt to deem enrollment brokers and/or Program of All-Inclusive Care for the 
Elderly (PACE) organizations to be reliable sources.
Notes:
1. These strategies were codified in the final rule, Streamlining the Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program, and Basic Health 
Program Application, Eligibility Determination, Enrollment, and Renewal Processes, which took effect June 3, 2024. Compliance with 
new requirements is phased in through June 3, 2027, with compliance timeframes varying by provision.
9



--- PAGE 32 ---
Strategies Available Under State Plan Authority
Certain waiver strategies are permissible in a materially similar way at states’ option under 
state plan authority.
Streamlining Asset Determinations Strategy – Under section 
1902(r)(2) of the Act, states may disregard (i.e., not count) 
otherwise countable income and/or resources in making 
non-MAGI1 eligibility determinations. States can disregard 
increases in beneficiary’s assets after their date of application.
Stable Income and Asset Strategy – States have flexibility to make a reasonable determination of what types of 
income and assets are highly likely to remain stable (or even decrease in value) in conducting an ex parte 
renewal.2 
MCO Renewal Support Strategy – Under existing managed care regulations, states may permit MCOs to conduct 
outreach and assist beneficiaries with completing and submitting renewal forms, provided that the plan does 
not provide choice counseling and does not sign the renewal form on behalf of the beneficiary. 
State Agency and/or Other Qualified Entities Using Presumptive Eligibility (PE) Strategy – Under existing 
regulations, states may permit qualified entities, including the state agency itself, to make PE determinations on 
a MAGI-basis for individuals not enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP. State agencies must treat a renewal form 
returned during the reconsideration period as an application. Thus, in adopting this strategy, states would 
extend the individual's PE status until the state has completed a determination of eligibility based on the 
renewal form. 
Further details on the most-
commonly-used strategies related to 
verifying income and resources can 
be found on slides 11–17.
Notes: 
1. MAGI is Modified Adjusted Gross Income. Non-MAGI refers to individuals excepted from MAGI-based financial methodologies under 
42 C.F.R. § 435.603(j).
2. Additional information on ex parte renewals will be included in forthcoming guidance.
10



--- PAGE 33 ---
Strategies Related to Verifying Income and Resources
Unwinding-related waiver strategies to streamline income and resource verification during the 
ex parte process were particularly effective in supporting states’ efforts to minimize the 
administrative burden associated with conducting renewals and prevent the improper 
disenrollment of eligible beneficiaries. 
Existing verification policies can be used to achieve long-term use of these strategies.1

 
Using Gross Income 
Determinations 
from SNAP2 and 
Other Human 
Services Programs
Completing an ex 
parte renewal when 
no data sources3 
return income 
information
Streamlining the use 
of the state’s asset 
verification system 
(AVS)
Notes: 
1. Additional information regarding the data and analyses supporting the rationale for long-term use of these strategies is included in 
the CIB.
2. SNAP is the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. 
3. Throughout the following sections, references to “data sources” means those data sources a state uses to verify eligibility factors for 
Medicaid. These data sources must be identified in the state’s verification plan, as required by 42 C.F.R. 435.945(j).
11



--- PAGE 34 ---
Using Gross Income Determinations from SNAP and Other 
Human Services Programs
States may use SNAP gross income as a data source for verifying MAGI-based income 
eligibility.
Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority: 

To simplify the use of SNAP and TANF information when making eligibility determinations during 
unwinding, CMS waived the requirement to make a Medicaid income determination for 
individuals whose gross income, as determined by the state’s SNAP and/or TANF agency, was at or 
below the applicable Medicaid income standard. 
State Plan Option: 

States have flexibility, within certain parameters, to determine which data sources are useful in 
verifying income.1 States have flexibility to determine that the gross income determination made 
by SNAP is a useful source of data to verify income for MAGI-based eligibility. 

States may find SNAP gross income or other program data useful in verifying income for non-
MAGI beneficiaries. States may also find data from other human services programs, such as TANF, 
useful for verifying MAGI-based eligibility. If interested, a state must conduct and share with CMS 
an analysis to demonstrate the data’s usefulness and identify it in the state’s verification plan.
Notes: 
1. States can continue to use the underlying data for specific types of income in an applicant or beneficiary’s SNAP record. 
12



--- PAGE 35 ---
Implementing the Use of SNAP Gross Income as a Data 
Source

When considering implementation of this strategy, states should assess the 
usefulness of SNAP data in the same manner as they are expected to do for other 
data sources, considering such factors as the accuracy, timeliness, 
comprehensiveness, and complexity of accessing the data. 

States can use a gross income determination from SNAP as a data source for 
verifying income eligibility for MAGI Medicaid.1 

If determined useful, states can use SNAP gross income determinations as a data 
source at application, at renewal, or both.

States may also target this strategy to specific populations, for example, using the 
strategy only for individuals whose SNAP gross income is at or below a specified 
level, e.g., 100 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL).
Notes:
1. CMS does not believe that states could reasonably conclude that net income for purposes of SNAP eligibility is useful in verifying MAGI-
based income, as the determination of net SNAP income involves deduction of several significant income disregards from the gross 
income amount. 
13



--- PAGE 36 ---
Options to Complete Ex Parte Renewal When No Data 
Sources Return Income Information
States may consider individuals with a previously-verified attestation of zero-dollar income or 
income at or below 100% of the FPL as having income that is highly unlikely to change.
Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority: 

During unwinding, CMS authorized two related waiver strategies for individuals with prior determinations of 
zero-dollar income and individuals with a prior determination of income at or below 100% of the FPL that 
enabled states to renew coverage on an ex parte basis when the state checked all available income data 
sources, but no income data was returned. 
State Plan Option:

Under current verification policies,1 states have flexibility to consider information in a beneficiary’s account 
reliable if the state has determined the information is highly unlikely to change or, in the case of income or 
assets, highly unlikely to increase.

CMS has determined it would be reasonable for a state to determine that the previously-verified income in 
a beneficiary’s account is reliable in conducting an ex parte renewal if: 
1.
The individual had a previously-verified attestation of income at or below an income level (including 
zero-dollar income) elected by the state, not to exceed 100% FPL; 
2.
The state has checked all available income data sources according to its verification plan and no 
information is received; and 
3.
The state follows its verification plan to confirm the beneficiary’s continued state residency.2
Notes:
1.
Additional guidance on state verification requirements and flexibilities is forthcoming.
2.
Effective December 3, 2025, consistent with 42 C.F.R. § 435.919(f) and 457.344, states are required to regularly obtain updated address information from reliable 
data sources and update the beneficiary’s record with that information if a data source provides an updated in-state address. If a reliable data source provides an 
out-of-state address, the state must terminate the beneficiary's coverage if the beneficiary does not confirm they continue to meet the residency requirements.
14



--- PAGE 37 ---
Implementing the Strategy to Complete Ex Parte Renewal 
When No Data Sources Return Income Information
States may elect to apply this strategy only to individuals whose previously-verified 
income was zero dollars or to individuals whose previously-verified income was at or 
below a standard elected by the state, up to 100% FPL, and may elect a different income 
standard for different eligibility groups.
States adopting this strategy must also establish and document a maximum amount of 
time that is permitted to elapse since the state last verified a beneficiary’s income (either 
at application or renewal).1 
States must have the information necessary to match with the income data sources used 
by the state (e.g., Social Security Number).
States must take steps to review other non-financial eligibility criteria. 
States must notify individuals of the requirement to inform the agency if the information 
relied on in the renewal is inaccurate.
Notes:
1. CMS considers a verified attestation of income that was made no earlier than three years prior to be reasonable. However, states may 
establish a different reasonable amount of time.
15



--- PAGE 38 ---
Strategy to Streamline Use of Asset Verification System 
(AVS)
States can assume no change in resources when no information is returned through the AVS 
or when information is not returned within a reasonable timeframe.
Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority: 

For individuals subject to an asset test whose eligibility is being determined on the basis of being age 65 or older or 
having blindness or a disability, section 1940 of the Act requires states to use an Asset Verification System (AVS) to 
verify assets held in a financial institution.

During unwinding, CMS approved a waiver strategy that allowed states to assume no change in assets verified 
through the AVS when no information is returned or when information is not returned within a reasonable 
timeframe and complete the ex parte renewal process without any further verification of assets. 
State Plan Option:

Current verification policies require that a state establish a reasonable timeframe to wait for information to be 
returned from its AVS before requesting documentation or other information to verify assets. 

Provided a state builds into its ex parte renewal process a reasonable period of time for financial institutions to 
respond to an AVS query, CMS has determined that the state may assume no change in the value of a previously-
verified asset if the state submits a request through its AVS and no information is returned or there is no response 
from the AVS within the reasonable timeframe the state has established.1 This would enable the state to complete 
an ex parte renewal without requesting additional documentation of asset types that can be verified with AVS. 

If the individual only has assets held in financial institutions, or their only other assets are not likely to appreciate in 
value, the state would be able to complete the ex parte renewal. 

Any information returned by AVS that might impact eligibility after an individual's eligibility has been renewed must 
be treated as a change in circumstances in accordance with 42 CFR 435.919.
Notes: 
1. Regulations at 42 C.F.R. § 435.916 afford states the flexibility to determine that certain assets are unlikely to appreciate in value and allow 
states to rely on the value of the asset in a beneficiary’s account at renewal. 
16



--- PAGE 39 ---
Implementing the Streamlined Use of AVS
In establishing a reasonable timeframe to wait for data to be returned from its AVS, 
states should consider the response times experienced in their AVS.
The reasonable timeframe does not need to be the same at application as at renewal.
States may consider initiating the AVS check ahead of other data sources that are 
checked during the ex parte process to account for a potentially lengthier AVS response 
time. 
The state must notify individuals of the requirement to inform the agency if the asset 
information used in the renewal is inaccurate (required for all ex parte renewals).
If the state receives asset information from the AVS after a beneficiary has been renewed 
on an ex parte basis, the information from the AVS must be processed as a change in 
circumstance.
17



--- PAGE 40 ---
Discontinued Blanket Authority for Unwinding-
Related 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Strategies 
18



--- PAGE 41 ---
Discontinued Blanket Waiver Authority
Existing statutory and regulatory requirements do not allow states to continue the following 
strategies under section 1902(e)(14)(A) of the Act after June 30, 2025. 
― Suspend the requirement to cooperate in obtaining medical support
― Waive the requirement to record telephonic signatures 
― Permit designation of an authorized representative over the telephone without a signed 
designation
― Renew Medicaid eligibility for children and/or non-MAGI beneficiaries for 12 months based on 
the individual’s most recent Medicaid determination 
― Delay resumption of Medicaid premiums until after redetermining eligibility
― Extend eligibility in the Former Foster Care Children group to youth formerly in foster care from 
any state, without regard to when the individual turned age 18
― Extend the timeframe to take final action on fair hearing requests and provide benefits pending a 
final decision to all individuals who request a hearing
― Reinstate eligibility back to termination date for those procedurally terminated who are 
determined eligible during the reconsideration period without determining retroactive eligibility
― Extend automatic reenrollment into a managed care plan up to 120 days after loss of Medicaid
Notes: Additional details regarding the strategies whose blanket authority will be discontinued after June 30, 2025, and potential 
alternative approaches states may adopt are included in the appendix table that accompanies the CIB.
19



--- PAGE 42 ---
Use of 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Authority Beyond June 30, 
2025

CMS recognizes that states are in various stages of resuming routine eligibility and enrollment 
operations. States may continue to use unwinding-related flexibilities through June 30, 2025.

As states work toward full compliance with renewal requirements, CMS expects states to 
continue or initiate mitigation strategies to minimize the impact of any non-compliance with 
requirements on Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries. 

States are instructed to outline proposed mitigations or seek approval for waivers, as 
appropriate, under section 1902(e)(14)(A) as part of the renewal compliance template. 
― To use any of the strategies for which the blanket approval is sunsetting and that are not 
permissible under current regulations, a state must request, and receive CMS approval of, 
new waiver authority. 

States may also seek CMS approval for section 1902(e)(14)(A) waivers for strategies beyond 
those noted in the CIB, whether needed in the context of renewal compliance or for another 
purpose.

Any requests to use 1902(e)(14)(A) waiver authority will be considered individually and 
approved on a time-limited basis.
Notes: For additional information, see September 20, 2024, CIB, State Compliance with Medicaid and CHIP Renewal Requirements by 
December 31, 2026. December 31, 2026 
20



--- PAGE 43 ---
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations 
to Delay Procedural Terminations
21



--- PAGE 44 ---
Regulatory Exception to Timely Determinations to Delay 
Procedural Terminations
During the unwinding, CMS concurred with states’ use of the regulatory timeliness exception1 
to delay procedural disenrollments for up to three months. This enabled states to conduct 
targeted outreach to encourage beneficiaries to return their renewal form.
As states return to regular operations, CMS’s broad concurrence with the application of 
this option will sunset after June 30, 2025, as states are expected to have made 
significant progress in resuming operations. 
However, to achieve a similar result, states can build additional time into their renewal 
process by adjusting the timing of renewal notifications to:
― provide beneficiaries more time to return their renewal form; and
― conduct targeted outreach before the end of the eligibility period to beneficiaries at risk of 
losing coverage for procedural reasons.
If a state experiences an administrative or other emergency (e.g., natural disaster) and 
the state would like to use the timeliness exception to delay procedural terminations to 
conduct targeted outreach, CMS strongly recommends that the state seek CMS 
concurrence to do so. 
Notes: 
1. The exception to timely determinations of eligibility at 42 C.F.R. § 435.912(e) permits a state to exceed the timeliness standard when 
there is an administrative or other emergency beyond the agency’s control.
22



--- PAGE 45 ---
State Resources
23



--- PAGE 46 ---
CMS Resources to Support States
•
CMCS Informational Bulletin, Use of Unwinding-Related Strategies to Support Long-Term Improvements to 
State Medicaid Eligibility and Enrollment Processes, November 2024, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cibe1411142024.pdf
•
CMCS Informational Bulletin, Extension of Temporary Unwinding-Related Flexibilities, May 2024, available 
at: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/cib050924-e14.pdf
•
Medicaid Program; “Streamlining the Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program, and Basic Health 
Program Application, Eligibility Determination, and Renewal Processes” final rule (89 FR 22836) available at: 
https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2024-06566
•
SHO# 22-001, Promoting Continuity of Coverage and Distributing Eligibility and Enrollment Workload in 
Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Upon 
Conclusion of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, March 2022, available at:  
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/sho22001.pdf 
•
COVID-19 PHE Unwinding Section 1902(e)(14)(A) Waiver Approvals, available at: 
https://www.medicaid.gov/resources-for-states/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/unwinding-and-
returning-regular-operations-after-covid-19/covid-19-phe-unwinding-section-1902e14a-waiver-
approvals/index.html 
24
